139
Accenture
Accenture plc is a global multinational professional services company originating in the United States and headquartered in Dublin, Ireland, that specializes in information technology (IT) services and management consulting. A Fortune Global 500 company, it reported revenues of $64.9 billion in 2024.

History
Formation and early years
Accenture began as the business and technology consulting division of accounting firm Arthur Andersen in the early 1950s. The division conducted a feasibility study for General Electric to install a computer at Appliance Park in Louisville, Kentucky, which led to GE's installation of a UNIVAC I computer and printer, believed to be the first commercial use of a computer in the United States.

Split from Arthur Andersen
In 1989, Arthur Andersen and Andersen Consulting became separate units of Andersen Worldwide Société Coopérative (AWSC). Throughout the 1990s, tensions grew between the two units. Andersen Consulting was paying Arthur Andersen up to 15% of its profits each year (a provision of the 1989 split was that the more profitable unit – whether AA or AC, pay the other the 15 percent), while at the same time Arthur Andersen was competing with Andersen Consulting through its own newly established business consulting service line called Arthur Andersen Business Consulting. This dispute came to a head in 1998, when Andersen Consulting put the 15% transfer payment for that year and future years into escrow and issued a claim for breach of contract against AWSC and Arthur Andersen. In 2000, as a result of arbitration, Andersen Consulting broke all contractual ties with AWSC and Arthur Andersen. As part of the arbitration settlement, Andersen Consulting paid $1.2 billion to Arthur Andersen and changed its name to Accenture.
On 1 January 2001, Andersen Consulting adopted the name, "Accenture". The word "Accenture" was derived from "Accent on the future". The name "Accenture" was submitted by Kim Petersen, a Danish employee from the company's Oslo, Norway office. Petersen hoped that the name would not be offensive in any country in which Accenture operates, because the word itself was meaningless.

Incorporation and public listing
Accenture was incorporated in Bermuda in 2001. On 19 July 2001, Accenture's initial public offering (IPO) was priced at $14.50 per share, and the shares began trading on the New York Stock Exchange. Because of the split from Andersen, Accenture avoided prosecution on June 16, 2002, when the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission prosecuted Arthur Andersen for obstructing justice and accounting fraud.

Reincorporation in Ireland
On 26 May 2009, Accenture announced that its board of directors unanimously approved changing the company's place of incorporation from Bermuda to Ireland.

Services and operations
Accenture's business is organized into five segments:

Strategy and Consulting
Interactive (under the market name Accenture Song)
Technology
Operations
Industry X
The company provides services to clients in various industries, including communications, media and technology, financial services, health and public service, consumer products, and resources.

Corporate affairs
Leadership
William D. Green became the CEO in September 2004. Green was replaced by Pierre Nanterme in January 2011. In January 2019, Nanterme stepped down from his position, citing health reasons. Chief Financial Officer David Rowland was named as the interim CEO. Julie Sweet was appointed CEO in September 2019.

Employees
As of 2024, Accenture reported having approximately 774,000 employees.

Finances
The financial results were as follows:

Controversies
Incorporation in a tax haven
In October 2002, the Congressional General Accounting Office (GAO) identified Accenture as one of four publicly traded federal contractors that were incorporated in a tax haven. The other three, unlike Accenture, were incorporated in the United States before they re-incorporated in a tax haven, thereby lowering their US taxes. Critics such as former CNN journalist Lou Dobbs, reported Accenture's decision to incorporate in Bermuda was a US tax avoidance ploy, because they viewed Accenture as having been a US-based company. The GAO itself did not characterize Accenture as having been a US-based company; it stated that "prior to incorporating in Bermuda, Accenture was operating as a series of related partnerships and corporations under the control of its partners through the mechanism of contracts with a Swiss coordinating entity."

UK NHS technology project
Accenture engaged in an IT overhaul project for the British National Health Service (NHS) in 2003, making headlines when it withdrew from the contract in 2006 over disputes related to delays and cost overruns. The government of the United Kingdom ultimately abandoned the project five years later for the same reasons.

Tax avoidance
In 2012, it was revealed Accenture was paying only 3.5% in tax in Ireland as opposed to the average rate of 24% it would pay if instead based in the UK.

US immigration
In June 2018, Accenture was asked to recruit 7,500 Customs and Border Protection officers. Under the $297 million contract, Accenture had been charging the US Government nearly $40,000 per hire, which was more than the annual salary of the average officer.  According to a report published by the DHS Office of Inspector General in December 2018, Accenture had been paid $13.6M through the first ten months of the contract. They had hired two agents against a contract goal of 7,500 hires over 5 years. The report was issued as a 'management alert', indicating an issue requiring immediate attention, stating that "Accenture has already taken longer to deploy and delivered less capability than promised". The contract was terminated in 2019.

Working conditions
In February 2019, contractors from Accenture's Austin, Texas, location who performed content moderation tasks for Facebook wrote an open letter to Facebook describing poor working conditions and a "Big Brother environment" that included restricted work breaks and strict non-disclosure agreements. A counselor in the Austin office stated that the content moderators could develop post-traumatic stress disorder as a result of the work, which included evaluating videos and images containing graphic violence, hate speech, animal abuse, and child abuse. Accenture issued a statement saying the company offers opportunities for moderators to advance, increase their wages, and provide input "to help shape their experience."

Tax practices
In February 2019, Accenture paid $200 million to Swiss authorities over tax claims related to transfer pricing arrangements.

Data breach
In August 2021, Accenture confirmed a data breach due to a ransomware attack, which reportedly led to the theft of six terabytes of data.

Employment practices
In March 2023, Accenture announced plans to eliminate 19,000 jobs over 18 months, citing reduced revenue forecasts.

See also
List of acquisitions by Accenture

References
External links

Official website