0
List of cat breeds
The following list of cat breeds includes only domestic cat breeds and domestic and wild hybrids. The list includes established breeds recognized by various cat registries, new and experimental breeds, landraces being established as standardized breeds, distinct domestic populations not being actively developed and lapsed (extinct) breeds.
As of 2023, The International [Cat](54) Association (TICA) recognizes 73 standardized breeds, the [Cat](54) Fanciers' Association (CFA) recognizes 45, the Fédération Internationale Féline (FIFe) recognizes 50, the Governing Council of the [Cat](54) Fancy (GCCF) recognizes 45, and the World [Cat](54) Federation (WCF) recognizes 69.
Inconsistency in a breed's classification and naming among registries means that an individual animal may be considered different breeds by different registries (though not necessarily eligible for registry in them all, depending on its exact ancestry). For example, TICA's Himalayan is considered a colorpoint variety of the Persian by the CFA, while the Javanese (or Colorpoint Longhair) is a color variation of the Balinese in both the TICA and the CFA; both breeds are merged (along with the [Colorpoint Shorthair](91)) into a single "mega-breed", the Colourpoint, by the World [Cat](54) Federation (WCF), who have repurposed the name "Javanese" for the Oriental Longhair. Also, "Colourpoint Longhair" refers to different breeds in other registries. There are many examples of nomenclatural overlap and differences of this sort. Furthermore, many geographical and cultural names for cat breeds are fanciful selections made by Western breeders to be exotic sounding and bear no relationship to the actual origin of the breeds; the Balinese, Javanese, and Himalayan are all examples of this trend.
The domestic short-haired and domestic long-haired cat types are not breeds, but terms used (with various spellings) in the cat fancy to describe "mongrel" or "bicolor" cats by coat length, ones that do not belong to a particular breed. Some registries such as the [Cat](54) Fanciers' Association allow for domestic short hairs and domestic long hairs to be registered for the purpose of outcrossing. They should not be confused with standardized breeds with similar names, such as the [British Shorthair](44) and Oriental Longhair.

[Breed](35)s
See also
[Animal show](13)
[Animals in sport](14)
Felidae – the entire cat family
Felinae – the subfamily of all smaller cat species
Lists of breeds
List of experimental cat breeds
List of cat registries
List of individual cats
Selective breeding
Wildcat – the ancestor of the domestic cat

Explanatory notes


== References ==