1079
2026 Mediterranean Games
The 2026 Mediterranean Games (Italian: Giochi del Mediterraneo 2026), officially known as the XX Mediterranean Games (Italian: XX Giochi del Mediterraneo) and commonly known as Taranto 2026, is a forthcoming international multi-sport event in the  Mediterranean Games series that is scheduled to be held from 21 August to 3 September 2026 in Taranto, Italy. Taranto was announced as the host city at the ICMG General Assembly in Patras, Greece, on 24 August 2019.
The games were originally set to be held from June 13 to 23, but were moved back to August 21 to September 3 to avoid the peak summer weather, as well as to not clash with any other major sporting events, such as the 2026 FIFA World Cup, which would allow more high-level athletes to participate.

Bidding process
In July 2019, the International Committee of Mediterranean Games (CIJM) announced the end of the candidature process and the sole candidate city, Taranto, for the 2026 Games, and on 24 August, Taranto was awarded the 2026 Games following a unanimous vote by the CIJM.

Development and preparation
Venues
The following sites and venues will be concerned: Taranto, Torricella, Sava, San Giorgio Jonico, Massafra, Martina Franca, Grottaglie, Ginosa, Crispiano, Castellaneta, Lecce, Brindisi, Francavilla Fontana, Fasano, Monopoli and the Valle d’Itria for cycling. The venues that will be rebuilt or improved are: «il campo scuola al quartiere Salinella, the stadio Iacovone, the Stadio Via del Mare, the Palamazzola, the Palafiom, the pattinodromo della Salinella and the circolo Tennis.

Emblem
The emblem for the 2026 Mediterranean Games was unveiled on 14 December 2019 at the Palace of Taranto. It was designed by the Istituto Comprensivo Gaetano Salvemini as part of a contest announced in May by the Municipality of Taranto. Resembling the Sailor Monument in the city, the emblem is formed up of two anthropomorphized x's that compose the number 20 written in Roman numerals.

Mascot
The mascot is Ionios, a dolphin carrying a torch. The dolphin is the symbol of Taranto.

The Games
Sports
23 Olympic sports will be contested and also 2 non-Olympic ones, with 7 team sports.

Participating nations
Athletes from 26 nations are expected to participate in the games.


== References ==