1083
2032 Summer Olympics
The 2032 Summer Olympics, officially the Games of the XXXV Olympiad and also known as Brisbane 2032, is an upcoming international multi-sport event scheduled to take place from 23 July to 8 August 2032, with Brisbane, Queensland, Australia as the main host city. They will be the third Olympic Games held in Australia, after the [1956 Summer Olympics](1021) in Melbourne, Victoria and the [2000 Summer Olympics](1054) in Sydney, New South Wales. It will be the first Summer Olympics to be hosted in more than one city, with multiple cities/regions hosting it. After the 2016 Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, they will be the second Summer Olympics held during the winter. 
Following changes in the bidding rules, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) selected and announced Brisbane as the winning bid on 21 July 2021, two days before the start of the [2020 Summer Olympics](1074). Brisbane was first announced as the preferred bid on 24 February 2021, gaining the formal approval of the IOC Executive Board on 10 June 2021. Brisbane became the first host city to be selected to host the Olympics through the new bid process.
The event will be the fourth Summer Games to be held in the Southern Hemisphere, after the aforementioned games in Australia and the [2016 Summer Olympics](1068) in Rio de Janeiro. With the Brisbane Olympics following the 2028 Los Angeles Games, the Games will be the second time the Olympics were held in Australia following the United States (as last occurred with the 1996 Atlanta Games and the 2000 Sydney Games). Australia will also become the second country after the United States to have three different cities host the Summer Olympics and is expected to receive the Olympic flag during the closing ceremony of the [2028 Summer Olympics](1080) in Los Angeles, United States.

Bidding process
The new IOC bidding process was approved at the 134th IOC Session on 24 June 2019 in Lausanne, Switzerland. The key proposals, driven by the relevant recommendations from Olympic Agenda 2020, are:

Establish a permanent, ongoing dialogue to explore and create interest among cities/regions/countries and National Olympic Committees for any Olympic event
Create two Future Host Commissions (Summer and Winter Games) to oversee interest in future Olympic events and report to the IOC executive board
Give the IOC Session more influence by having non-executive board members form part of the Future Host Commissions.
The IOC also modified the Olympic Charter to increase its flexibility by removing the date of election from 7 years before the games and changing the host from a single city/region/country to multiple cities, regions, or countries.
The change in the bidding process was criticised by members of the German bid as "incomprehensible" and hard to surpass "in terms of non-transparency".

Future Host Summer Commissions
The full composition of the Summer Commissions, oversee interested hosts, or with potential hosts where the IOC may want to create interest, is as follows:

Dialogue stages
According to Future Host Commission terms of reference with rules of conduct, the new IOC bidding system is divided into two dialogue stages:

Continuous Dialogue: Non-committal discussions between the IOC and Interested Parties (City/Region/Country/NOC interested in hosting) concerning hosting future Olympic events.
Targeted Dialogue: Targeted discussions with one or more Interested Parties (called Preferred Host(s)), as instructed by the IOC Executive Board. This follows a recommendation by the Future Host Commission as a result of Continuous Dialogue.

Host selection
Brisbane was confirmed as host of the 2032 Summer Olympics at the 138th IOC Session on 21 July 2021 in Tokyo, Japan. Having been awarded the hosting rights 11 years and 2 days in advance, this is the most amount of time a host city has had in planning and organizing an Olympic Games.  As per the new format of choosing future Olympic Games host cities from the IOC's Agenda 2020, the vote was in a form of a referendum to the 80 IOC delegates. According to the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, 72 of the delegates voted "Yes", 5 voted "No" and 3 other voters abstained. The city had previously bid for the 1992 edition; however, this was awarded to [Barcelona](1000).

Organisation
The Brisbane Organising Committee for the 2032 Olympic and Paralympic Games was established by the Queensland Government in 2021 to plan, organise and deliver the Olympic and Paralympic Games in accordance with the host contract.

Development and preparations
From the 2021 selection of the city as the host for the 2032 Summer Olympics, Brisbane has 11 years to prepare for the games. A feasibility study commissioned by the South East Queensland Council of Mayors in 2019 suggested that the Games could be a catalyst for increased transport and infrastructure investment. Additionally, 68% of the required venues were judged to already exist or could be upgraded to an Olympic standard. It concluded that, excluding government agency costs and contributions by the IOC and the private sector, the Games net cost would be $900 million. This amount also did not include the suggested billions of dollars of greater investment in roads and public transport that would be required for the Games to be successful.
In 2023, the federal and state governments reached a funding deal, with the Commonwealth contributing $2.5 billion for the Brisbane Live arena and $1 billion for other infrastructure. The remaining costs would be borne by the Queensland Government.

Venue construction and renovations
A new 17–18,000-seat arena known as Brisbane Live is planned to be constructed at Roma Street Parkland; it was stated to host aquatics events.
The Gabba was originally slated to be demolished and rebuilt to host ceremonies and athletics, expanding it to 50,000 seats and adding a new pedestrian plaza. The costs of the Gabba project were scrutinized by politicians; it was originally announced at a cost of $1 billion, but by February 2023, it had increased to $2.7 billion, which would be paid entirely by the state. Scrutiny over the Gabba project grew after Victoria withdrew its hosting of the 2026 Commonwealth Games due to cost concerns. In December 2023, Lord Mayor Adrian Schrinne withdrew his support for the project, stating that Brisbane 2032 had "become more about overpriced stadiums rather than the promise of vital transport solutions", and that Queensland's announcement of a proposed stadium at the Brisbane Showgrounds to house the AFL Brisbane Lions and cricket during construction (with Brisbane City Council, the Lions, and Cricket Australia being expected to cover two thirds of the $137 million cost) was the "final straw".
On 13 December 2023, former Premier of Queensland Steven Miles announced the establishment of a Brisbane 2032 infrastructure authority, and an independent review of the Games' venue plans. On 18 March 2024, Miles announced that the Gabba reconstruction had been scrapped as a result, and that Lang Park (which is already scheduled to host rugby sevens and football) and Queensland Sport and Athletics Centre would host ceremonies and athletics instead. Both venues will be refurbished, while reports that had been commissioned as part of the Gabba project would be used to guide future work on the stadium. Brisbane Live was also relocated to the Roma Street Parkland, rather than above the Roma Street railway station. While the review recommended the construction of a new stadium at Victoria Park, Miles stated he wanted Brisbane 2032 to be a "low-cost" games, and that he could not justify a $3.4 billion stadium "when Queenslanders are struggling with housing and other costs". 
In August 2024, a group known as the Brisbane Design Alliance proposed "Northshore Vision 2050": a mixed-use redevelopment of the Northshore precinct in the suburb of Hamilton. The first stage of the project proposed a sports and entertainment district anchored by a new 60,000-seat stadium, as a replacement for the Gabba and a potential Olympic venue. The project was budgeted at $6 billion, with the developers claiming it would be privately funded; however, the developers also hoped that state land would be granted to them for development and that transport infrastructure would be upgraded. Miles was sceptical of the proposal, arguing that there was "no chance" a stadium could be built solely through private funding and arguing that the plan appeared very preliminary.
In September 2024, former politician and Premier of Western Australia, Colin Barnett, suggested during a talk show on 4BC that the Queensland government should consider building a copy of Perth's Optus Stadium in Brisbane, which, if it were to go ahead, would save time and costs on building a new stadium from scratch, as well as giving Brisbane a modern replacement for The Gabba. 
In October 2024, the new Premier of Queensland David Crisafulli initiated a 100-day venue review starting in November of that year, which would choose their site for the Olympic stadium, which would include the previously cancelled Gabba rebuild and Victoria Park stadium. The plan to have athletics at the Queensland Sport and Athletics Centre was scrapped, and the Victoria Park stadium may also be ruled out after the Deputy Premier of Queensland, Jarrod Bleijie suggested that no new stadium should be built.

Infrastructure
As of 2021, Brisbane has many infrastructure projects under construction or planning on top of the games. Cross River Rail, scheduled to be completed in 2026, is an underground railway project through central Brisbane, which is under construction. Cross River Rail will see the development of a new rail line underneath Brisbane River, and the redevelopment of several stations in the Brisbane central business district with a cost of over A$6 billion. Another transport infrastructure projects is the Brisbane Metro bus rapid transit project which consists of two routes with a headway of up to five minutes during peak times. The project is scheduled to be completed in late 2024. In May 2024, funding was announced for the proposed Maroochydore railway line, expected to be completed by 2032.
Brisbane Lord Mayor Adrian Schrinner proposed that a 7-hectare (17-acre) glass factory at 137 Montague Rd, South Brisbane, be redeveloped into a 57,000 m2 (613,500 sq ft) International Broadcast Centre along the banks of the Brisbane River.
The main Athletes' Village will be constructed at Hamilton.

Venues
Venues will be located in three zones in South East Queensland: Brisbane as the main host city, and neighbouring city of Gold Coast and the region of Sunshine Coast will support the main host city. Another four cities will host football preliminaries: Cairns, and Townsville in the state of Queensland. Melbourne and Sydney — Australia's two previous host cities in 1956 and 2000, respectively—will also host football preliminaries.
The majority of the venues for the Games are existing or are planned to undergo refurbishment, including Lang Park (which will serve as ceremonies venue, and host football finals and rugby sevens) and Queensland Sport and Athletics Centre (which will host athletics).

The Games
Sports
The program of the Summer Olympics consists of mandatory "core" sports that persist between Games and up to six optional sports: optional sports are proposed by the organising committee in order to improve local interest, provided that the total number of participants does not exceed a presumed 10,500 athletes.
Various sanctioning bodies have announced plans to pursue bids for sports to be added to the 2032 Summer Olympics:

A delegation from the World Flying Disc Federation has campaigned to include a flying disc sport in Brisbane 2032.
In February 2021, Softball Australia, Baseball Australia and the World Baseball Softball Confederation announced their intent to pursue baseball and softball for the Brisbane 2032 programs. CEO of Baseball Australia Glenn Williams noted record broadcasting audiences for baseball and softball at the [2020 Summer Olympics](1074), with Softball Australia chair Richard Lindell also supporting the sports' reinstatement into the core Olympic program. Both disciplines have medalled for Australia at the Olympics. Baseball/softball was selected by the Los Angeles 2028 organising committee for inclusion in its program.
In July 2021, International Rugby League (IRL) chair Troy Grant stated that the organisation planned to pursue rugby league nines and wheelchair rugby league for the 2032 Olympics and Paralympics respectively.
In August 2021, the International Cricket Council (ICC) announced the establishment of a working group to pursue cricket for the Los Angeles 2028 and Brisbane 2032 Summer Olympics, including representatives from the Asian Cricket Council (ACC), England and Wales Cricket Board (ECB), USA Cricket, and Zimbabwe Cricket. The bid has also received backing from the Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI). Cricket is one of the most popular sports in Australia, and Cricket Australia is one of the 12 full members of the ICC. Cricket was selected by the Los Angeles 2028 organising committee for inclusion in its program.
In August 2021, World Netball announced that it would pursue the inclusion of netball, with backing from Netball Australia. The country has won the Netball World Cup eleven times since its inception. The bid faces a potential obstacle from the IOC's current policy of gender parity, as men's netball is not at parity with women's netball in terms of participation and prominence.
In October 2023, the World Squash Federation announced its intent to pursue squash for the 2032 Olympics. Squash was already included in the 2028 Olympics as an optional sport.
In December 2023, the International Federation of American Football (IFAF) announced that it already started pursuing flag football for the 2032 Olympics. Flag football was already included in the 2028 Olympics as an optional sport.
In January 2024, the World DanceSport Federation approved a strategic plan for 2024–2032, which aimed to have breakdancing (which debuted as an optional sport in 2024, but was excluded from 2028) admitted as a core Olympic sport.
In April 2024, the Trail Running Association of Queensland (TRAQ) initiated a ten-year plan to pursue trail running for Brisbane 2032. Around the same time, a campaign by Merrell was launched with a 455 kilometres (283 mi) relay from 2012 host, London, to 2024 host, Paris.
In April 2024, the International Life Saving Federation (ILS) and Surf Life Saving Australia announced their intent to pursue beach lifesaving sports for Brisbane 2032, with a  focus on oceanman/woman and mixed relay events. A number of Australian Olympians have had a background in lifesaving sport, including Grant Hackett and Ky Hurst.
In May 2024, the Federation of International Touch announced its intent to pursue touch for the 2032 Olympic with a focus on the mixed version of the game to be included as home sport

Broadcasting rights
Domestically, the Games will be televised by Nine Entertainment properties (including the Nine Network), which acquired the rights to the Olympics from 2024 through 2032 in a deal announced on 8 February 2023. These Games also mark the final year of the IOC's long-term broadcasting contracts with CMG in China, Warner Bros. Discovery in Europe, and NBCUniversal in the United States, among others. The IOC has not yet begun to award broadcast rights beyond 2032, stating that it was waiting "for the best market conditions".

External links
Official website

See also
[2032 Summer Paralympics](1084)
Olympic Games held in Australia
[1956 Summer Olympics](1021) – Melbourne
[2000 Summer Olympics](1054) – Sydney
2032 Summer Olympics – Brisbane
List of IOC country codes
Major sport events in Brisbane and surrounding areas

References
Further reading
Independent Review of Brisbane 2032 Olympic and Paralympic Venue Infrastructure, 2024
Queensland Government Response to Independent Review of Brisbane 2032 Olympic and Paralympic Venue Infrastructure, 2024