1091
AVE
Alta Velocidad Española (AVE) is a high-speed rail service operated by Renfe, the Spanish State railway company.
The first AVE service was inaugurated in 1992, with the introduction of the first Spanish high-speed railway connecting the cities of Madrid, Córdoba and Seville.
In addition to Renfe's use of the [Administrador de Infraestructuras Ferroviarias](1098)-managed rail infrastructure in Spain, Renfe offers two AVE services partially in France, connecting respectively Barcelona-Lyon and Madrid-Marseille.
Alta Velocidad Española translates to "Spanish High Speed", but the initials are also a play on the word ave, meaning "bird". AVE trains operate at speeds of up to 300 km/h (186 mph).

Services
As of 2024 Renfe offers the following AVE services:

Alicante–León via Albacete, Cuenca, Madrid Chamartín, Valladolid and Palencia.
Alicante–Ourense via Albacete, Cuenca, Madrid Chamartín and Zamora.
Barcelona–Granada via Tarragona, Lleida, Zaragoza, Ciudad Real, Puertollano, Córdoba and Antequera.
Barcelona–Málaga via Tarragona, Lleida, Zaragoza, Ciudad Real, Córdoba, Puente Genil-Herrera, and Antequera.
Barcelona–Seville via Tarragona, Lleida, Zaragoza, Ciudad Real, Puertollano and Córdoba (trains with selective stops are also scheduled).
Burgos–Murcia via Valladolid, Segovia, Madrid-Chamartín, Elche and Orihuela.
Gijón–Castellón via Oviedo, Mieres Del Camín, La Pola, León, Palencia, Valladolid, Segovia, Madrid-Chamartín, Cuenca, Valencia and Sagunto.
Gijón–Vinaros, via Oviedo, Mieres Del Camín, La Pola, León, Palencia, Valladolid, Segovia, Madrid-Chamartín, Cuenca, Valencia, Sagunto, Castellón, Benicàssim, Oropesa del Mar and Benicarló (only in summertime).
Huesca–Seville via Tardienta, Zaragoza, Calatayud, Guadalajara, Madrid-Puerta de Atocha and Córdoba
Madrid–A Coruña via Zamora, Ourense and Santiago De Compostela.
Madrid–Alicante via Cuenca, Albacete, and Villena (non stop trains and trains with selective stops are also scheduled).
Madrid–Barcelona via Guadalajara, Calatayud, Zaragoza, Lleida, and Tarragona (non stop trains and trains with selective stops are also scheduled).
Madrid–Castellón via Cuenca, Requena-Utiel and Valencia.
Madrid–Figueres via Guadalajara, Calatayud, Zaragoza, Lleida, Tarragona, Barcelona and Girona (trains are scheduled with selective stops).
Madrid–Gijón via Valladolid, Palencia, León and Oviedo.
Madrid–Granada via Ciudad Real, Puertollano, Córdoba, Puente Genil-Herrera, Antequera and Loja (trains with selective stops are also scheduled).
Madrid–Huesca via Guadalajara, Calatayud, Zaragoza, and Tardienta.
Madrid–León via Segovia, Valladolid and Palencia.
Madrid–Málaga via Ciudad Real, Puertollano, Córdoba, Puente Genil-Herrera, and Antequera (non stop trains and trains with selective stops are also scheduled).
Madrid–Murcia via Elche and Orihuela (some trains are arriving to Alicante and then reversing towards Murcia).
Madrid–Ourense via Zamora.
Madrid–Seville via Ciudad Real, Puertollano, and Córdoba (non stop trains and trains with selective stops are also scheduled).
Madrid–Valencia via Cuenca and Requena-Utiel (non stop trains are also scheduled).
Madrid–Vigo via Zamora, Sanabria, A Gudiña, Ourense, Santiago de Compostela, Vilagarcía de Arousa and Pontevedra (trains with selective stops are also scheduled).
Valencia–Burgos via Requena-Utiel, Cuenca, Madrid Chamartín and Valladolid (trains with selective stops are also scheduled).
Valencia–León via via Requena-Utiel, Cuenca, Madrid-Chamartín, Segovia, Valladolid and Palencia (trains with selective stops are also scheduled).
Valencia–Seville via Cuenca, Ciudad Real, Puertollano, and Córdoba.

International:
Barcelona–Lyon via Girona, Figueres, Perpignan, Narbonne, Montpellier, Nîmes, and Valence.
Madrid–Marseille via Guadalajara, Zaragoza, Tarragona, Barcelona, Girona, Figueres, Perpignan, Narbonne, Béziers, Montpellier, Nîmes, Avignon and Aix-en-Provence.
The central hub of the AVE system is Madrid's Puerta de Atocha, except for the Madrid–Asturias, Madrid–Burgos, Madrid–Galicia, Madrid–Alicante and Madrid-Murcia lines, that terminate at Chamartín station.

Trains
Currently, there are several series of high-speed trains that run the AVE service:

S-100, manufactured by Alstom
S-102, manufactured by Talgo and Bombardier
S-103, manufactured by Siemens, marketed globally under the brand Siemens Velaro
S-106, manufactured by Talgo, marketed globally as Talgo AVRIL.
S-112, manufactured by Talgo and Bombardier

Passenger usage
The still-growing network transported a record 32.4 million passengers in 2023.  Though the network length is extensive, it lags in ridership behind comparable high-speed rail systems in Japan, France, Germany, China, Taiwan, and Korea.

Rail infrastructure in Spain and Europe
Rail transport in Spain
High-speed rail in Spain
High-speed rail in Europe
Train categories in Europe

Notes
References
External links

AVE (Renfe)