1323
Alpine garden
An alpine garden (or alpinarium, alpinum) is a domestic or botanical garden, or more often a part of a larger garden, specializing in the collection and cultivation of alpine plants growing naturally at high altitudes around the world, such as in the Caucasus, Pyrenees, Rocky Mountains, Alps, Himalayas and Andes.  It is one of the most common types of rock garden.
Although it is often associated with rocks, an alpine garden does not require rocks to thrive. It is the alpine plants that is the focus, not the rocks. Scientifically, alpine plants are characterized as plants that grow above the tree line in mountainous regions, where the environment makes it hard for plants to produce woody tissues. From the horticulture perspective, any plants with a suitable size and is able to withstand harsh conditions such as a rock garden, trough, or raised beds could be considered as alpine. They are often smaller in statue and more hardy.
An alpine garden tries to imitate the conditions of the plants' place of origin. One example of this is using large stones and gravel beds, rather than the soil that naturally grows there. Though the plants can cope with low temperatures, they dislike standing in damp soil during the winter months. The soil used is typically poor (sandy) and extremely well-drained. One of the main obstacles in developing an alpine garden is the unsuitable conditions which exist in some areas, particularly mild or severe winters and heavy rainfall, such as those present in the United Kingdom and Ireland. This can be avoided by growing the plants in an alpine house (essentially an unheated greenhouse), which tries to reproduce the ideal conditions, or just covering them with a raised sheet of glass in winter. According to some Austrian sources, the first true alpine garden was created by Anton Kerner von Marilaun in 1875 on the Blaser Mountain, in Tyrol, Austria, at an altitude of 2,190 m (7,190 ft).

Vegetation
Typical plants found in an alpine garden include: 

Androsace
Arabis alpina (rock cress)
Campanula - alpine species
Dianthus - alpine species
Gentiana
Geranium dalmaticum (cranesbill)
Globularia
Iberis sempervirens (candytuft)
Leontopodium
Phlox subulata
Pulsatilla vulgaris (pasque flower)
Primula - alpine species
Ranunculus (buttercup)
Rhodanthemum hosmariense
Saxifraga - alpine species
Scutellaria orientalis (helmet flower)
Sedum spathulifolium (stonecrop)
Sisyrinchium
Thymus (thyme)

Botanical gardens with an alpine house or garden
Austria
Botanical Garden of the University of Innsbruck

Belgium
Plantentuin Universiteit Gent

Canada
Jardin botanique de Montréal
University of Alberta Botanic Garden: Patrick Seymour Alpine Garden
University of British Columbia: E.H. Lohbrunner Alpine Garden
Alpinegium
China
Lijiang Alpine Botanic Garden
France
Jardin des Plantes
Jardin botanique alpin du Lautaret
Jardin botanique alpin La Jaÿsinia
Germany
Botanischer Erlebnisgarten Altenburg
Botanical Garden in Berlin
Botanischer Garten Bielefeld
Botanischer Garten Düsseldorf
Botanischer Garten Gießen
Botanischer Garten der Johann Wolfgang Goethe-Universität Frankfurt am Main
Botanischer Garten München-Nymphenburg
Botanischer Garten Münster
Botanischer Garten Marburg
Botanischer Garten Potsdam
Botanischer Garten der Ruhr-Universität Bochum
Italy
Orto botanico di Padova
Slovenia
Alpine Botanical Garden Juliana
The Netherlands
Botanische Tuin Fort Hoofddijk
Hortus Botanicus Amsterdam
United Kingdom
Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
RHS Wisley
Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh
United States
Betty Ford Alpine Gardens
Denver Botanic Gardens

See also
List of garden types

References
External links
(in English) Alpine Garden Society
(in English) North American Rock Garden Society
(in English) Scottish Rock Garden Club
(in English) New Zealand Alpine Garden Society
(English) Alpine Garden Society - Dublin Group - Home Page
(in Dutch) Nederlandse Rotsplanten Vereniging Archived 2015-05-17 at the Wayback Machine
(in Dutch) Vlaamse Rotsplanten Vereniging

Making a Rock Garden by Henry Sherman Adams, 1912
 Making a Rock Garden public domain audiobook at LibriVox