1481
Dries van Agt
Andreas Antonius Maria "Dries" van Agt (Dutch: ˈdris fɑn ˈɑxt ; 2 February 1931 – 5 February 2024) was a Dutch politician, jurist and diplomat who served as Prime Minister of the Netherlands from 19 December 1977 until 4 November 1982. He was a prominent leader of the Catholic People's Party (KVP) and later its successor party, the [Christian Democratic Appeal](1455) (CDA).
Van Agt was known for his abilities as a skilful debater and negotiator. During his premiership, his cabinets were responsible for several major public sector and civil service reforms and further reducing the deficit following the recession in the 1980s. Van Agt continued to comment on political affairs as a statesman until he suffered a major stroke in May 2019 which forced him to undergo rehabilitation. He held the distinction as the oldest living and earliest serving former prime minister following the death of Piet de Jong in July 2016, until his own death in February 2024.

Early life
Andreas Antonius Maria van Agt was born in Geldrop in the province of North Brabant in a Roman Catholic family. After receiving his diploma Gymnasium-A at the Augustinianum, he studied at the Catholic University of [Nijmegen](1400), where he received his Doctorate in Law in 1955. After graduating, he practised law in Eindhoven until 1957, after which he worked in the office of legal and business affairs of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries until 1962. From 1962 to 1968, he worked for the Ministry of Justice.

Political career
Minister and deputy prime minister
Van Agt entered politics as a member of the Catholic People's Party, which merged with the other two major Christian democratic parties in 1980 to form the [Christian Democratic Appeal](1455) (CDA). From 1968 to 1971, Van Agt was Professor of Criminal Law at the Catholic University of [Nijmegen](1400). From 1971 to 1973, he served as Minister of Justice in the first and second Biesheuvel cabinets. He caused outrage when he tried to pardon the last three Nazi war criminals still in Dutch prisons (known as The Breda Four) in 1972. From 1973 to 1977, he served as Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Justice in the Den Uyl cabinet.

Leader of the [Christian Democratic Appeal](1455)
In 1976, Van Agt was elected the first Leader of the [Christian Democratic Appeal](1455), then still a federation of the three confessional parties: the Christian Historical Union, the Catholic People's Party and the Anti-Revolutionary Party, which contested with a united list for the first time in the 1977 general election (the merger followed in 1980). With Van Agt as its lead candidate, the [Christian Democratic Appeal](1455) reversed years of decline in 1977 and returned to power.

Prime minister in the Van Agt I cabinet
In the parliamentary election of May 1977, the Labour Party (PvdA) obtained its largest number of seats, so a second Den Uyl cabinet seemed likely. However, the tension between the Catholic People's Party and the Labour Party in the last coalition, combined with the fact that a coalition between the [Christian Democratic Appeal](1455) and the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) was possible, the talks failed after a period of seven months. Eventually Van Agt negotiated a deal with VVD leader Hans Wiegel. From 19 December 1977 to 11 September 1981, Van Agt served as Prime Minister of the Netherlands and Minister of General Affairs in the Van Agt I cabinet.

Prime minister in the Van Agt II cabinet
In 1981 general election, the CDA and the VVD both lost parliamentary seats, so a continuation of the CDA–VVD coalition was not possible, and Van Agt was forced to enter into a coalition with the Labour Party and the [Democrats 66](1475) (which, under Jan Terlouw, had gained a significant number of seats). Three months of difficult negotiations resulted in the Van Agt II cabinet (11 September 1981 – 29 May 1982). In this composition, Van Agt worked with Joop den Uyl again as Den Uyl was made Deputy Prime Minister and "super minister" of Social Affairs and Employment. The characterological and political differences led to several divisions, and in May 1982 the government fell.
The personal strife between Van Agt and Den Uyl had deteriorated to such an extent that when Den Uyl died from a brain tumor in 1987, Van Agt was not invited to the memorial service by the family. Den Uyl's wife Liesbeth argued that Van Agt had prevented the second Den Uyl cabinet from forming in 1977.

Prime minister in the Van Agt III cabinet
The caretaker government continued as a minority cabinet, with only ministers from the parties [Christian Democratic Appeal](1455) and [Democrats 66](1475), in the Van Agt III cabinet. For replacing the six Labour Party ministers, five new [Christian Democratic Appeal](1455) and [Democrats 66](1475) ministers were appointed, while Van Agt, in addition to being prime minister, took the position of Minister of Foreign Affairs upon him.
A new parliamentary election was planned for September 1982. Although Van Agt by this point was worn out, he was persuaded to lead his party's list again, but shortly after the election he withdrew as a candidate for prime minister and was succeeded by Ruud Lubbers.

After politics
Diplomat
Dries van Agt served as Ambassador of the European Community to Japan from 1987 to 1990 and to the United States from 1990 to 1995. From 1995 to 1996, he was a Visiting Professor of International Relations at the University of Kyoto.

Professor
Until his death, Van Agt was Prime Counsellor for the International Forum for Justice and Peace, a foundation under Dutch law, registered at the Chamber of Commerce in Amsterdam. Chaired by retired international businessman Ben Smoes, they are currently focused on justice and peace in regard to the Israeli–Palestinian conflict.

Activism
Van Agt lectured in Cairo in May 2006 at the invitation of the Egyptian electronic magazine Arab-West Report about great changes in the cultural climate of north-western Europe in the past decades, becoming more hostile to religion, including Islam. Muslims, he argued, need to understand those changes to be able to respond better to European criticism of Islam and the Muslim world.
Van Agt also spoke against the Council of State in Egypt for continuous delay in granting the Center for Arab-West Understanding (CAWU) the NGO status. He met with prominent figures in Egypt to persuade them to do so. The Egyptian Council of State, after van Agt's visit to Cairo in 2006, ruled on 18 February 2007 that the center should be recognized as an NGO under Egyptian law, ending its three-year struggle to obtain this status. Egypt is known for its reluctance in granting NGO status to discourage political participation. Cornelis Hulsman, a Dutch sociologist, the editor-in-chief of Arab-West Report, and the head of CAWU, stated that van Agt's effort significantly impacted the realization of their goals, which usually requires a lengthy amount of time and scrutiny in its political purposes.
For some years, Van Agt took an outspoken stance regarding the Middle East, resulting in a fierce criticism of the policies undertaken by the government of Israel with regard to the Palestinians. When in office, Van Agt was a staunch supporter of Israel, but after he stepped down in 1982, he changed his mind. According to his own words an important turning point was a visit at the late nineties at Bethlehem University on the Israeli-occupied West Bank. He accused Israel of "state terrorism" and turning the Palestinian Authority territories into "bantustans". 
In 2009, Van Agt founded The Rights Forum, a non-profit organization aimed at promoting a “just and sustainable Dutch and European policy regarding the Palestine/Israel issue”. In 2012, he said that Jews should have had a state in Germany instead of Israel. In September 2016, in reference to the visit of Prime Minister of Israel Benjamin Netanyahu to the Netherlands, Van Agt argued that the ongoing Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories and the building of settlements there constituted a war crime under the Rome Statute and suggested that Netanyahu should have been sent to the International Criminal Court.

Personal life and death
Van Agt was known for his use of archaic language and complicated phrasing, as well as for his love for cycling. He married Eugenie Krekelberg in 1958, and they had three children and seven grandchildren, including professional cyclist Eva van Agt. In 2012, he joined the Advisory Board of the International Museum for Family History. Van Agt lived in Heilig Landstichting, near [Nijmegen](1400), until his death.
Van Agt and his wife, after choosing euthanasia, died on 5 February 2024, three days after his 93rd birthday. According to family, the couple died holding hands. Van Agt had previously suffered a debilitating brain hemorrhage while giving a speech in 2019.

Decorations
Honours
Awards
Honorary degrees
Notes
References
External links

(in Dutch) Mr. A.A.M. (Dries) van Agt Parlement & Politiek
(in Dutch) Kabinet-Van Agt I Rijksoverheid
(in Dutch) Kabinet-Van Agt II Rijksoverheid
(in Dutch) Kabinet-Van Agt III Rijksoverheid