1511
2021 Danish local elections
Local elections were held in 2021 for [Denmark](1500)'s 98 municipal councils and five regional councils. All 2,436 seats were contested for the 2022–2025 term of office, together with 205 seats in five regional councils. Frederiksberg Municipality had increased their number of councillors from 25 to 29.

Opinion polls
Results
Results of regional elections
The regions are not municipalities but are financed only through bloc grants.

Number of councillors and political parties in the regional councils
Old and new chairs of the regional councils
In four of the five regions, the incumbent chairman kept the position. However, in the North [Denmark](1500) Region, an agreement was made between Venstre, the Danish People's Party, New Right and the Conservative People's Party to give the chairmanship to Mads Duedahl of Venstre. This was the first time since the region's establishment in 2007 that the Social Democrats did not win the region's chairmanship.

Results of municipal elections
Seats for the 98 municipal councils were up for vote.

Number of councillors and political parties in the municipal councils
The Conservatives had their best local election results since 1985.

Number of absolute majorities (a majority of seats won by the party itself)
Number of municipal council elections contested and number of municipal councils representations by party
Mayors in the municipalities
The mayors (Danish: borgmester; plural: borgmestre) of the 98 municipalities head the council meetings and are the chair of the finance committee in each of their respective municipalities. Only in Copenhagen, this mayor – the head of the finance committee and council meetings – is called the lord mayor (Danish: overborgmester).

Sum of mayor positions and seats won by Folketing Constituency
North Jutland
West Jutland
East Jutland
South Jutland
Funen
Zealand
North Zealand
Greater Copenhagen
Copenhagen
Bornholm
Overview of mayors prior to and after the elections
The term of office for the mayors elected by the majority of councillors among its members in each municipal council is the same as for the councils elected, namely 1 January 2022 until 31 December 2025. The correct name for the Municipality on the somewhat remote island of Bornholm is Regional Municipality, because the Municipality also handles several tasks not carried out by the other Danish municipalities but by the regions.

Notes


== References ==