1519
Aarhus University
[Aarhus](1516) University (Danish: [Aarhus](1516) Universitet, abbreviated AU) is a public research university with its main campus located in [Aarhus](1516), [Denmark](1500). It is the second largest and second oldest university in [Denmark](1500). The university is part of the Coimbra Group, the Guild, and Utrecht Network of European universities and is a member of the European University Association.
The university was founded in [Aarhus](1516), [Denmark](1500), in 1928 and comprises five faculties in Arts, Natural Sciences, Technical Sciences, Health, and Business and Social Sciences and has a total of twenty-seven departments. It is home to over thirty internationally recognised research centres, including fifteen centres of excellence funded by the Danish National Research Foundation.
The university's alumni include [Bjarne Stroustrup](842), the inventor of programming language [C++](640); Queen Margrethe II of [Denmark](1500);  King Frederik X of [Denmark](1500); and Anders Fogh Rasmussen, former prime minister of [Denmark](1500) and a secretary general of NATO.
Nobel Laureate Jens Christian Skou (Chemistry, 1997) conducted his groundbreaking work on the Na/K-ATPase in [Aarhus](1516) and remained employed at the university until his retirement. Two other Nobel laureates, namely Trygve Haavelmo (Economics, 1989) and Dale T. Mortensen (Economics, 2010), were affiliated with the university.

History
Early developments
[Aarhus](1516) University was founded on 11 September 1928 as Universitetsundervisningen i Jylland ("University Studies in Jutland") with a budget of 33,000 DKK and an enrollment of 64 students, which rose to 78 during the first semester. The university was founded as a response to the increasing number of students at the University of Copenhagen after World War I. Classrooms were rented from the Technical College and the teaching corps consisted of one professor of philosophy and four associate professors of Danish, English, German and French. Along with the Universitets-Samvirket ("University Association") which consisted of representatives of [Aarhus](1516)' businesses, organisations and institutions, the municipality of [Aarhus](1516) had fought since 1921 to have [Denmark](1500)'s next university located in the city.
In 1929, the municipality of [Aarhus](1516) gave the university land with a landscape of rolling hills. The design of the university buildings and 12 ha campus area was assigned to architects C. F. Møller, Kay Fisker and Povl Stegmann, who won the architectural competition in 1931. Construction of the first buildings began a year later, but the campus was developed in stages and is still under development as of 2017. Since 1939, C. F. Møller Architects has been responsible for the architectural design of [Aarhus](1516) University in accordance with the original functionalist design key, perhaps best exemplified by the characteristic yellow brick and tile.
The first buildings were finished in 1933 and housed the Departments of Chemistry, Physics and Anatomy. These departments later moved to newer buildings at the campus and the original building complex now house Department of Psychology and Department of Political Science. The construction of the first stage was funded solely by donations which totaled 935,000 Dkr and the buildings covered an area of 4,190m2. One of the most generous contributors to the first stage was De Forenede Teglværker i [Aarhus](1516) ("The United Tileworks of [Aarhus](1516)") led by director K. Nymark. Forenede Teglværker decided to donate 1 million yellow bricks and tiles worth c. 50,000 Dkr and later decided to extend the donation to all bricks needed. The inauguration on 11 September 1933, marked the first official use of the name [Aarhus](1516) University and was celebrated in a tent on campus, attended by King Christian X, Queen Alexandrine, their son Crown Prince Frederik and Prime Minister Stauning together with 1000 invited guests. On 23 April 1934, [Aarhus](1516) University was given permission to hold examinations by the king and on 10 October 1935, Professor Dr. phil. Ernst Frandsen was appointed the first rector of the university.
Shortages of materials and a stressed economy postponed and delayed further development of [Aarhus](1516) University. In 1941, construction of the Main Building (Hovedbygningen) commenced, a complex to house the university aula (assembly hall) and canteen among academic and administrative purposes. The stringent minimalist and uncompromising functionalistic design of the first university buildings from 1933 had stirred some local dissatisfaction and it was decided that the Main Building should possess more traditional romantic and classical architectural inspirations - although in agreement with the original architectural plan - and also make use of more lavish and expensive materials. The Main Building was finished in 1946 and still stands out from the rest of the university campus as somewhat different in its architectural design.
In comparison with the original 4,190m2 floor space of the first buildings, [Aarhus](1516) University now holds a floor space of 246,000m2 in the University Park alone. A series of buildings outside the main campus adds an additional floor space of 59,000m2.

Faculties
From 1928, [Aarhus](1516) University offered courses in languages and philosophy, but the students were unable to finish their studies without going to the University of Copenhagen for their final examinations. By request of the Ministry of Education, the Teachers' Association made a draft of how to conduct the final examinations in the humanistic subjects in [Aarhus](1516) and in the draft, the association proposed that the faculty was named the Faculty of Humanities by analogy with the corresponding faculties in Uppsala, Lund and Turku. After negotiations between the faculties in [Aarhus](1516) and Copenhagen, the king declared on 8 May 1935 that the final university examinations could be held at the Faculty of Philosophy in Copenhagen as well as at the Faculty of Humanities in [Aarhus](1516). This was the first final examinations [Aarhus](1516) University was allowed to hold, but on 24 July 1936 the king granted the Faculty of Humanities the right to hold examinations for the magister degree and in 1940 for the PhD.
[Aarhus](1516) University had offered courses in basic medical subjects from 1933 and on 10 October 1935 the Faculty of Medicine was formally established. The establishment of a Faculty of Medicine in [Aarhus](1516) was met with some opposition from the Faculty of Medicine at the University of Copenhagen. The professors thought that the state should not establish a new faculty until the shortcomings of the old one had been solved. In the end, the professors agreed to sign a recommendation for the new faculty as long as improvements to the old one were not delayed. By 1953, the Faculty of Medicine had been fully built, complete with lectures, professorship chairs, final exams, research facilities and the hospitals of [Aarhus](1516) had been expanded to meet the demands of clinical training. In 1992, the Faculty of Medicine merged with the dental school and changed its name to Faculty of Health Sciences. In 1998, the new faculty emphasized clinical training for students of the third semester who have frequented one year of anatomy and cell biology, and introduced a new not assessed curriculum of pre-clinical skills laboratory (two hours per week for nine weeks) followed by two weeks of social medicine and an eight-week clinical clerkship at county hospitals.
The university established its Faculty of Economics and Law in 1936, but when it offered courses in political science and in psychology (1959 and 1968, respectively), the faculty changed its name to the Faculty of Social Sciences. The faculty had to be funded solely on private donations and once the university demonstrated it had the needed financial means, the Minister of Education recommended the Finance Committee to approve the establishment of the faculty on 27 January 1936 since the state did not have to grant financial support. The Committee approved and by declaration of the king on 5 November 1937, the faculty could hold examinations in economics and law.
Courses had been offered in theology since 1932 at the Faculty of Humanities, but in 1942 the Faculty of Theology was formally established. Already on 22 June 1928, Reverend Balslev of [Aarhus](1516) had proposed that Universitetsundervisningen i [Aarhus](1516) (not yet university) taught basic courses in theology. Though the proposal was greeted by the management, the Faculty of Theology in Copenhagen pointed out that it would take three full-time teachers of the New Testament, Old Testament and ecclesiastical history, respectively as well as education in Latin, Greek and Hebrew by the Faculty of Humanities. At this time, Universitetsundervisningen i [Aarhus](1516) did not have the financial means to meet these criteria so the case was shelved for the time being. In April 1931, the case reopened, this time by Bishop Skat Hoffmeyer who proposed free teaching in the required subjects. The management asked the faculty in Copenhagen if this was acceptable, but because the teaching was free, the faculty saw it as tutoring rather than actual teaching and they neither approved or disproved of such an approach though they did not see it as actual university teaching. The municipality of [Aarhus](1516) did not aid with funds and the management deemed a request of the state to be futile so they decided to disregard getting the teaching approved and start it anyway under the supervision of Skat Hoffmeyer. On 5 September 1932 the Reverend Asmund held the first lecture in theology. This private education in theology continued until the university could hire its own professors in 1938, and in 1942 [Aarhus](1516) University could at long last establish the Faculty of Theology. The [Aarhus](1516) New University Hospital shares Masonic architectural elements related to its history of seat of the Danish Order of Freemasons.

Main Building and World War II
In 1938, the university management acknowledged it was time to consider an expansion due to lack of space and overcrowding of the auditoriums. The solution was the Main Building (Hovedbygningen), containing both rooms and facilities for new academic areas, as well as housing for the general administration, an assembly hall and a canteen. The building was to be organized according to a principle of institutes so that teaching and research took place in certain rooms with their own library and study for the professor.

The construction of the building took place during the German occupation of [Denmark](1500) (1940–45) in World War II, which affected the process in more than one way. No state funds had been involved in the construction of the first university building and a second building for physiology, biochemistry, and a high voltage laboratory, but because the Nazis were against civil use of materials and work forces, the state contributed to the main building. In 1943, the Gestapo, Sicherheitsdienst, Geheime Feldpolizei and Abwehr set up their regional headquarters in the five student halls of residence on campus. Fearing that the same would happen to the new main building, its completion was delayed. C. F. Møller later wrote that for once there was plenty of time to work on the details of the building, like patterned brickwork, acoustic screens and furniture. Furniture designer Aage Windeleff, designed the furniture specially for the main building, while Børge Mogensen's industrially produced furniture designs are the most commonly used elsewhere on campus.
The presence of the Gestapo in [Aarhus](1516) led to multiple arrests of Danish resistance fighters and the resistance movement soon realized they needed outside assistance. On 15 October, the leader of the illegal Danish underground army in Jutland, Niels Bennike, sent the following telegram to London:

Undergrunden i Jyland ved at blive revet op af Gestapo. Vigtigere at få ødelagt arkiver og bevare vore folk end at bevare arkiver og få ødelagt vore folk. Jeg beder indtrængende om, at kollegium 4 og 5, gentager 4 og 5, må blive ødelagt ved luftangreb. Det er de to vestligste, gentager vestligste, bygninger i universitetskomplekset. Haster, gentager haster.
("Underground in Jutland getting torn up by the Gestapo. More important to get the archives destroyed and save our people than getting our people destroyed and save the archives. I implore that residence hall 4 and 5, repeat 4 and 5, be destroyed by air strike. They are the two farthest to the west, repeat farthest to the west, buildings of the university complex. Urgent, repeat urgent.")

On 31 October 1944, the Royal Air Force bombed the Gestapo's headquarters in residence halls 4 and 5, also killing ten civilian workers. 2 Group Bomber Command carried out the bombing by using 25 Mosquito planes. The air strike on the University of [Aarhus](1516) took place in a heavily populated area and the campus was surrounded by three hospitals. To avoid civilian casualties, the RAF prepared with a model of the campus, shooting at residence halls 4 and 5 with chalk bags. The architect C. F. Møller was in the main building during the air strike but survived and was later dug free from the rubble. The reconstructed main building opened on 11 September 1946.

Since 1970
[Aarhus](1516) University was an independent institution until 1970, but with management representatives from the city council and the organization of Universitets-Samvirket. Hereafter, the university became a state-run institution under the first University Act. With the next University Act in 1992, external organizations were once again represented in the administration and under the 2003 Act, all Danish universities are governed by a nationwide university board. This board appoints the rector, deans and heads of departments instead of the students. It commenced in January 2004 for the first time and in August 2005, a new rector was appointed.
In 1994, the university was a scene of a shooting; three people (including the perpetrator) were killed and two more were injured.
[Aarhus](1516) University has hosted significant musical events. The Grateful Dead played there on April 16, 1972; the recorded performance was part of the group's Europe '72 tour.
In the current century, several higher education institutions have been merged with [Aarhus](1516) University. Following the Danish University reform of 2006, AU merged with the Business and Engineering School in Herning (now part of faculty of Business and Social Science) and the Danish School of Education in Copenhagen (now part of Faculty of Arts), making the university nationwide and adding 6,000 students. In 2007, the National Environmental Research Institute (NERI), until then part of the Ministry of Environment and Energy, and the Danish Institute of Agricultural Sciences (DJF), until then part of the Ministry of Agriculture, were merged into AU. The two institutions initially formed separate faculties, which later merged with the Faculty of Science to form the Faculty of Science and Technology.
In 2012, [Aarhus](1516) University's School of Engineering was merged with the university proper, making it [Denmark](1500)'s largest.
A major reorganisation of the university effective 1 Jan 2011 reorganised departments into four faculties: Arts, Science and Technology, Health, and Business and Social Sciences. A further reorganisation occurred effective 1 Jan 2020, where Science and Technology was split into two new entities: Faculty of Technical Sciences and Faculty of Natural Sciences.

Campus
[Aarhus](1516) University's main campus is located in central [Aarhus](1516), encircling the University Park (Universitetsparken).
The campus master plan competition was won in 1931 by the collaborative scheme of Danish architects Kay Fisker, C. F. Møller and Povl Stegmann in collaboration with landscape architect Carl Theodor Sørensen. The design includes a wide variety of buildings in a large area, but each building is constructed of the same yellow brick and roofing tile and with a common design key, providing the whole campus with a unified appearance. Construction commenced in 1932 and has continued into present times, lately in 1999-2001 (Søauditorierne) and 2014-17 (AU Health). The original main building was one of the first Danish functionalist public buildings and has been included in the Ministry of Culture's canon of Danish architecture; it is acknowledged as one of the twelve most significant architectural works in the cultural history of [Denmark](1500). In a harmonic interplay with the park, the yellow buildings form a campus that has received international recognition for its aesthetic values and it has been protected by law since 1993, in order to conserve its unique design. C. F. Møller and his company, C. F. Møller Architects have continued as architects of the campus ever since, except the new department of AU Health currently under construction, designed by Cubo. The park and campus has been expanded throughout the years, in 1957 the old park of Vennelystparken, just south of the university park was included.
Apart from the main campus, [Aarhus](1516) University has several smaller campuses and departments throughout [Aarhus](1516). This includes the campus on Fuglsangs Alle in [Aarhus](1516) V, hosting a large part of [Aarhus](1516) BSS, and campus Nobelparken, adjacent to the university park and built in 1997–2004 in red brick, also by C. F. Møller Architects, but in a different design, parts of the research park IT-byen at Katrinebjerg, where the Department of Computer Science also teach and do research, and more recently (still under construction), the buildings of the former municipal hospital across the street from the university park. [Archaeology](157) and anthropology takes residence in Moesgård Manor, an old manor house at the new Moesgård Museum.
[Aarhus](1516) University also has locations outside of [Aarhus](1516). In the city of Herning, there is a small campus where a few of the university's business, engineering and technology programmes are taught, called the Department of Business Development and Technology. In Copenhagen, part of the Danish School of Education is located at Campus Emdrup.

Dormitories
A large part of the dormitories, e.g. Børglum Kollegiet, and youth accommodation in [Aarhus](1516) is administered by the non-profit housing cooperative of Kollegiekontoret or though the public web-platform Ungdomsboliger.dk providing access to student and youth accommodation all across [Denmark](1500). Only the Parkkollegierne (full name: Kollegierne i Universitetsparken) dormitories are located on campus and run by [Aarhus](1516) University; other dormitories are located elsewhere, all across the city. It is also the only dormitory exclusively for students at [Aarhus](1516) University.

Organisation and administration
The university is governed by the university board which has 11 members: six members recruited outside the university form the majority of the board, two members are appointed by the academic staff, one member is appointed by the technical/administrative staff, and two members are appointed by the university students. As required by Danish law, the rector is appointed by the university board. The rector in turn appoints deans and deans appoint heads of departments. There is no faculty senate and faculty is not involved in the appointment of rector, deans, or department heads. Hence Danish universities has no faculty governance.

Main academic areas
Since 1 January 2020, the university has been organised into five main academic areas:

Technical Sciences – consists of the subjects of environmental sciences, agricultural science, and engineering from the former Faculty of Science and Technology.
Natural Sciences – consists of the remaining departments which were part of the former Faculty of Science and Technology.
Arts – consists of the former Faculty of Humanities and the former Faculty of Theology.
[Aarhus](1516) BSS – consists of the former Faculty of Social Sciences and the [Aarhus](1516) School of Business.
Health – consists of the former Faculty of Health Sciences.

Academics
As of 1 October 2021, more than 32,000 students were enrolled in [Aarhus](1516) University. Each year more than 1000 international exchange students come to [Aarhus](1516) University to study for one or two terms. In 2009 close to 3000 international students were enrolled in full degree programmes. [Aarhus](1516) University is an international university with a large proportion of students at the post-baccalaureate level: over half of its students are enrolled in master's degree and PhD programmes. In 2011, 59 of the university's 113 Master's degree programmes were taught in English. Talent development of young researchers has been identified as one of the university's core activities. This means that highly qualified students have the option of starting their PhD studies before completing their master's degree. The university's doctoral programmes allow talented students to enroll in a combined Master's/PhD programme either right after completing the master's degree (the 5+3 track) or one year into their master's degree programme (the 4+4 track). Since 2006 the number of PhD students has risen from approximately 1000 to approximately 1700 in 2010.

International Centre
The International Centre maintains international partnerships and combines a wide range of services for exchange students, international full-degree students, PhDs and visiting scholars. The International Centre is often the first stop for foreign students at [Aarhus](1516) University, since the centre offers advice on finding housing and living in [Denmark](1500).

AU Summer University
Starting in 2011 all summer courses and summer schools offered by [Aarhus](1516) University for bachelor's, master's and PhD students will be gathered together and expanded to provide more diversity in a new framework: AU Summer University. In the summer of 2011 more than 80 courses were offered within the fields of humanities, theology, social sciences, health sciences, natural sciences, agricultural sciences, business and educational sciences. Summer courses are open to both Danish and international students.

Degree programmes
[Aarhus](1516) University has seen some deep administrational changes since the turn of the century and now also includes several large sub-departments such as [Aarhus](1516) BSS, AU Engineering and others. Each of these sub-departments offers undergraduate and/or graduate programmes specific to their own field of study. The core academic degree programmes of [Aarhus](1516) University include the following fields:

The university offers eight undergraduate and about 60 graduate programmes in English.

Cheminova controversy and academic freedom at AU
Since 1944, [Aarhus](1516) University owned Cheminova, a chemical manufacturer which, among other controversies, has been selling methyl parathion pesticide to Brazil farmers. In 2009, senior researcher Mette Jensen emailed her colleagues at AU, asking whether they thought Cheminova should stop selling the controversial pesticides. For this, the university threatened her with dismissal. The university's Pro-Vice-Chancellor Søren E. Frandsen denied that the university had made any mistakes or threatened the freedom of speech and academic freedom of its staff.
On 30 April 2015, Cheminova was sold to the FMC Corporation for DKK 8.5 billion, a controversial issue in itself.

Major research centres
[Aarhus](1516) University is home to 15 Centres of Excellence supported by the Danish National Research Foundation and a considerable number of major research centres.
The 15 Centres of Excellence are:

Centre for Membrane Pumps in Cells and Disease (PUMPKIN)
Centre for Insoluble Protein Structures (INSPIN)
Centre for Geomicrobiology
Centre for Materials Crystallography (CMC)
Centre for DNA Nanotechnology
Centre for Functionally Integrative Neuroscience (CFIN)d
Centre on Autobiographical Memory Research (CON AMORE)
Centre for Massive Data Algorithmics (MADALGO)
The Water and Salt Research Centre
Centre for Carbonate Recognition and Signaling (CARB)
Centre for Research in Econometric Analysis of Time Series (CREATES) which is one of the best econometrics center according to Economics Field Rankings: Econometrics | IDEAS/RePEc. Currently this center is positioned as second best center of research in econometric time series analysis.
Centre for Oxygen Microscopy and Imaging (COMI)
Centre for mRNP Biogenesis and Metabolism
Centre for Quantum Geometry of Moduli Spaces (QGM)
Centre for the Theory of Interactive Computation
Center for Theoretical Chemistry (qLEAP)
Centre for the Experimental-Philosophical Study of Discrimination （CEPDISC）
Some of the university's other major research centres include MindLab and iNANO.

MINDlab
MINDLAB was established with a DKK 120 million grant awarded by the Danish Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation. At MINDLab neuroscientists, psychologists, biologists, statisticians and researchers from other fields work together to understand the brain, its disorders, and its development through physical and social interactions – and vice versa.

iNANO
The Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center (founded in 2002 by Professor Flemming Besenbacher) offers a degree programme in nanoscience with an interdisciplinary curriculum covering a broad spectrum of introductory, advanced and specialised courses, aimed at providing the student with a sufficiently broad basis to conduct interdisciplinary research within nanoscience and at the same time achieve disciplinary depth and specialised skills in selected areas. Hence, the programme encompasses physics, chemistry, biology, molecular biology, mathematics and computer science.

Danish Centre for Environment and Energy (DCE)
In 2011 the National Environmental Research Institute of [Denmark](1500) (NERI) was organisatorically moved from the Danish Ministry of Environment and Energy and merged into AU, under the new name Danish Centre for Environment and Energy (DCE). DCE consists of two departments: department of Bioscience and Department of Environmental Sciences, as well as a common secretariat, all under the Faculty of Technical Sciences. The core obligations of DCE continues to be to provide research based monitoring and advice to the Danish Government on environmental issues and conduct independent research and education within the same fields.

Danish Centre for Food and Agriculture (DCA)
Also in 2011 the Agricultural Research Institute of the Ministry of Agriculture was merged into AU. First as a separate faculty for Agricultural Research, later as part of the Faculty of Technical Sciences. The former departments are now organised as Departments of Agroecology, Animal Sciences, and Food Science, together with a common secretariat: Danish Centre for Food and Agriculture (DCA). The core obligations of DCA is to provide advice and supporting research to the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, while the departments also engage in independent research and teaching. The Global Rust Reference Center provides testing and investigation services of new and difficult cases of wheat stem rust/black stem rust.

Student life
Students from different fields meet in the numerous Friday bars and at various events organized by student organizations. The Friday bars are often organised by students from the different departments who set up a small, local bar in a canteen or classroom where beers and non-alcoholic drinks are served. The university also offers the Student bar (Studenterbaren) though Studenterhus [Aarhus](1516).
The university also has a number of libraries, some of which are open around the clock with student or employee cards. Almost every department has its own library, but the main library is the State and University Library. It has an extensive electronic journal database which students and staff can access either at the library or from home.
[Aarhus](1516) University Sports (AUS) is open to all university students and organises a wide range of activities from badminton, to fencing and chess.

Student organisations
The largest student organisations at [Aarhus](1516) University are the Student Union (Studenterrådet ved [Aarhus](1516) Universitet) and Studenterlauget. The Student Union represents the main student body at [Aarhus](1516) University in many boards and forums, while Studenterlauget is a mainly social organisation at School of Business and Social Sciences. The Student Union has both student seats on the university board. The Student Union also arranges annual concerts and seminars, and publishes the student magazine Delfinen (The Dolphin).
Besides the Student Union, there are political student organisations at the university often connected to the Danish political parties, the largest of which include the Social-Democratic Students (Frit Forum), Conservative Students (Konservative Studenter), and Liberal Students (Liberale Studerende). The Conservative Students union publishes the student magazine Critique. The Liberal Students union publishes the leaflet Minerva.

Clubs and societies
[Aarhus](1516) University offers many activities and services for foreign and Danish students. Several "Friday Bars", clubs organized and crewed by students at the university offer cheap beer and drinks, which has a wide appeal to the student body.

Students House
Studenternes Hus (The Students House) was built in 1964 at the central campus to accommodate students organisations, activities, festivities and gatherings. Among many other things, the buildings are headquarters to the students organisation Studenterhus [Aarhus](1516), and [Aarhus](1516) University offers a free membership to all exchange students. The Students House is a meeting place for international and Danish students in [Aarhus](1516) and Studenterhus [Aarhus](1516) organize social and cultural activities throughout the year, ranging from parties and road trips, to language classes and weekly international nights (a popular dinner club). The Students' House including the Student bar used to be run by the independent Studenterhusfonden, but was taken over by the university itself in 2020.

[Aarhus](1516) University Sports (AUS)
AUS is the official sports club of [Aarhus](1516) University, and is open to all university students. It is an umbrella organisation consisting of 18 independent member clubs, which host a wide range of activities, from badminton to fencing to chess. In addition, AUS also offers independent activities such as indoor soccer tournaments, badminton facilities, and surfing trips.

Dale's Café
Dale's Café is a meeting place for international students and the university's PhD students that opened in 2011. The café offers coffee, sandwiches and a wide selection of beers. It has an informal lounge area where students and young researchers can relax while enjoying snacks and beverages. Like the main building, Dale's Café is named after [Aarhus](1516) University's 2010 Nobel Laureate in Economic Sciences, Dale T. Mortensen. The Dale T. Mortensen Building houses the International Centre, the PhD House and the IC Dormitory, which contains 28 dorm rooms and two apartments dedicated to recently arrived international PhD students.

Klubben
Klubben (in English 'the club') is a bar located at the former ASB ([Aarhus](1516) School of Business), now under the faculty of School of Business and Social Sciences. The bar is open during regular school hours and weekdays, but hosts larger parties during Fridays and in relation to major sports events. Admittance is usually restricted to students of the School of Business and Social Sciences.

Studenterlauget
Studenterlauget, School of Business and Social Sciences (at the former ASB) is currently the largest student organisation in [Denmark](1500). The organisation has approximately 4,000 members whom they service through nine smaller "business units". Studenterlauget has around 300 student employees.

University museums
[Aarhus](1516) University operates a number of museums, both in and outside the university campus:

Moesgaard Museum (MOMU)
Steno Museum
Ole Rømer Observatory
[Aarhus](1516) Botanical Gardens and greenhouses
Natural History Museum
Museum of Ancient Art

Notable faculty and alumni, and students
Former and current faculty
Alumni
International recognition
[Aarhus](1516) University is highly ranked by international organizations and maintains its own page listing its current rankings. It is ranked 71st by the Shanghai Ranking (2021), 89th by National Taiwan University Ranking (2018), 95th by the U.S. News & World Report (2018), 106th by Times Higher Education World University Rankings (2021), and 155th by QS World University Rankings (2021).

Partner universities and membership
Member of the Coimbra Group
Member of the Utrecht Network

See also
Annual Regatta at [Aarhus](1516) University
List of modern universities in Europe (1801–1945)

References
Notes

Citations

Bibliography

External links

Official website
[Aarhus](1516) School of Business, [Aarhus](1516) University
National Environmental Research Institute, [Aarhus](1516) University
Danish School of Education, [Aarhus](1516) University
[Aarhus](1516) University, Institute of Business and Technology