1577
Astrid Kruse Jensen
Astrid Kruse Jensen (born 1975) is a Danish photographer and visual artist. She studied at the Gerrit Rietveld Academie in the Netherlands and the Glasgow School of Art in Scotland. Her artistic work is often characterized by its dreamy qualities, blurring the boundaries between memory, consciousness, reality, and illusion. 
Astrid Krusen Jensen has been nominated for several awards, and her work has been exhibited extensively in Europe, as well as in America and Asia. Her work is represented in several collections such as The National Museum for Photography, Denmark, The George Eastman House, Rochester, USA, Artotheque de Caen, France, Manchester City Gallery, UK and at AROS, [Aarhus](1516) Kunstmuseum, Denmark. 
Astrid Kruse Jensen lives and works in Copenhagen.

Early life
Born in 1975 in [Aarhus](1516), Jutland, Astrid Kruse Jensen began her education as a visual artist in 1995, when she studied at the School for Photography in [Aarhus](1516). In 1998, she continued her studies in the Netherlands at the Gerrit Rietveld Academy of Design in Amsterdam, and in 2002, she graduated after having spent two years at the Glasgow School of Art's Fine Art Photography department.
Astrid Kruse Jensen is represented by Martin Asbæk Gallery in Copenhagen and Wetterling Gallery in Stockholm

Photography
The paradox in the work of Astrid Kruse Jensen is her ability to use photography as a means of bringing reality together with the imaginary. She uses her camera as a tool for telling stories. Picking on quite ordinary subjects, she brings us images which suggest more than they actually show, allowing the beholder to interpret their full meaning. In 2014, Astrid Kruse Jensen received The ARKEN Travel Grant, donated by the Annie & Otto Johs. Detlefs’ Almennyttige Foundation. The purpose of the travel grant is to further young artists’ and curators’ knowledge of and dialogue with the international art scene, and Astrid Kruse Jensen was awarded the ARKEN Travel Grant 2014 for her ability to highlight staged, contrasting and eternal states through photography. The committee described how Astrid Kruse Jensen’s work created common stories that send the viewer on an emotionally powerful journey into our memories. 
In Fragments of Remembrance, the director of the Frederiksberg Museums Astrid La Cour writes: “Astrid Kruse Jensen's work with photography in recent years has been closely associated with an exploration of the concept of memory as a state of consciousness that bridges time and space. In this state her works are involved in constant motion between disappearance and appearance; between the discreet modelling of darkness and dazzling effacement by light. And within this field Astrid Kruse Jensen allows the chemical origins of photography to penetrate the subject and at one and the same time draw attention to its indispensability in the process of developing and its role as a filter that obscures, affects and forms the subject. The intrusive structures of the chemistry become an active, abstract visual processing of the fragmentary impressions of memory.”
In her recent ethereal series “Disappearing into the Past”, “Within the Landscape” and “Floating”, Astrid Kruse Jensen uses an old Polaroid camera and expired film to introduce unpredictability into her painterly compositions, creating light-drenched images that veer between concrete and mental landscapes. In her earlier series, Astrid Kruse Jensen used advanced technology to manipulate the light and darkness in her works. But here, Astrid Kruse Jensen takes advantage of the technical limitations and uncontrollable chemical processes of the Polaroid camera.
Behind this choice of imperfection lies not only a desire to challenge traditional working methods, but also an unmistakable acknowledgement of personal vulnerability, a desire to let go – and relinquish herself to a medium that is impossible to control. Astrid Kruse Jensen’s use of double exposures, backlight, long shutter times and camera movements results in motifs out of focus, where the specific space is dissolved and erased. In “Floating”, Astrid la Cour describes how Kruse Jensen’s work is “specifically photographic and decidedly painterly. Interiors and landscapes are located in an eternal interchange between a concrete and an abstract reality. She works with photography’s ability to record more than the human eye can capture and thus opens up a picture space that can only be rendered by way of the photographic gaze.” 
In her work, interiors and landscapes are dissolved in abstractions, which opens up an endless borderland or “a metaphysical universe transcending time and space”, a state between the concrete and the abstract that questions photography as a mediums and its documentational heritage. In 2017, Astrid Kruse Jensen was among 5 female artists, who were awarded with the painter Anne Marie Telmányis grant for female artist over the age of 40, who have made a remarkable artistic contribution in Denmark. The committee highlighted Astrid Kruse Jensen’s creation of works, which “question what we see … her realistic scenarios are floating and dreamy … and the unreal and fairytale-like penetrates us … and remains in the afterthought as a poetic imprint.” 
In 2021, Astrid Kruse Jensen received national attention for her duo-exhibition The Past Ahead of Me at Fotografisk Center, where she exhibited together with Norwegian photo-based artist Marie Sjøvold. The exhibition focused on subjects such as family, fragility, grief and loss, and here, Astrid Kruse Jensen also presented embroidery and bronze works. The square-shaped embroideries, titled Impossible Photographs, have the same format at the Polaroid photo, and the white text on the white background is difficult to read and bears the same sense of disappearance as her photographic works. The exhibition also included experimental approaches to photography, included photograph presented on fabric and bronze plates.

Exhibitions
Astrid Kruse Jensen's website provides the following list of solo exhibitions:
2021 

Fortiden foran mig, Fotografisk Center, Copenhagen, Denmark
Floating, Wetterling Gallery, Stockholm, Sweden
2019

Floating, Fotocentrum Raseburg, Karis, Finland
Floating, Martin Asbæk Gallery, Copenhagen, Denmark
2018

Memories and Hidden Places, Hafnarborg Centre of Culture and Fine Art, Hafnarfjordur, Iceland
2016

Reflections, Wetterling Gallery, Stockholm, Sweden
2015

Out of focus, Esbjerg Kunstmuseum, Esbjerg, Denmark
Beauty Will Always Be Disturbed, Wetterling Gallery, Stockholm, Sweden
Fragments of Remembrance, Martin Asbæk Gallery, Copenhagen, Denmark
2014

Within The Landscape, Sven Harrys Kunstmuseum, Stockholm, Sweden
Within The Landscape, Johannes Larsen Museet, Kerteminde, Denmark
2013

Astrid Kruse Jensen, La villa Culture, Ganshoren, Belgium
Astrid Kruse Jensen, La Venerie, Bruxelles, Belgium
Astrid Kruse Jensen, De Bourglinster, Luxembourg
2012

Disappearing into the past, Fotoforum, Stadtmuseum Schleswig, Germany
Disappearing into the past, Rønnebæksholm, Næstved, Denmark
Disappearing into the past, Martin Asbæk Gallery, Copenhagen, Denmark
Disappearing into the past, Museet for Fotokunst, Odense, Denmark
2011

On the other side of twilight, dual show with Elle Kooi, Stedelijk Museum, Holland
Enchanted Spaces, Ruchika's Art Gallery, Goa, India
Parallel Realities, Backslash Gallery, Paris, France
Disappearing into the past, Brundlund Slot, Aabenraa, Denmark
2010

Between the Real and the Imaginary, Maison du Danemark, Paris, France
The Construction of Memories, Galerie Mikael Andersen, Copenhagen, Denmark
Enchanted Spaces, Ganges Art gallery, Kolkata, India
Between the Real and the Imaginary, Galerie Mikael Andersen, Berlin, Germany
2009

Between the Real and the Imaginary, Artotheque de Caen, Caen, France
Hidden Places / Enchanted Spaces, The Viewing Room, Mumbai, India  
2008

Between the Real and the Imaginary, Vestsjællands Art Museum, Sorø, Denmark
Indefinite Spaces, Galerie Mikael  Andersen, Berlin, Germany
2007  

Selected Works, Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung, Berlin, Germany
2006  

Hypernatural, Centrum Kultury Zamek, Poznan, Poland
Hypernatural, Galleri Hornbaek, Hornbaek, Denmark
Parallel Landscapes, La Galeria, Barcelona, Spain
Power of Place, Harbourfront Centre, Toronto, Canada
Hypernatural, Kaunas Photo Days, Kaunas, Lithuania
Parallel Landscapes, Galerie Mikael Andersen, Copenhagen, Denmark
2005  

Allusions of Home, Women's Festival, Ljubljana, Slovenia
Hypernatural, Galleri Image, [Aarhus](1516), Denmark
2004  

Imaginary Realities, Philips Contemporary Art Gallery, Manchester, UK
Imaginary Realities, Galleri Skuggi, Reykjavik, Iceland

Publications
Floating, 2021. ISBN 978-91-87241-41-3
Beauty Will Always Be Disturbed, 2015. ISBN 978-38-68285-79-6
Disappearing into the Past, 2012. ISBN 978-87-88376-38-8
Imaginary Realities, Hypernatural, Parallel Landscapes, Indefinite Spaces. Selected works by Astrid Kruse Jensen, 2006. ISBN 87-7603-046-6

See also
Photography in Denmark

References
External links
Astrid Kruse Jensen's website
Astrid Kruse Jensen: Beauty will always be disturbed Video interview by Louisiana Channel, 2013.