1591
Babette's Feast
Babette's Feast (Danish: Babettes Gæstebud) is a 1987 Danish drama film directed by Gabriel Axel. The screenplay, written by Axel, was based on the 1958 story by Isak Dinesen (Karen Blixen). It was produced by Just Betzer, Bo Christensen and Benni Korzen, with funding from the Danish Film Institute. It stars Stéphane Audran, Birgitte Federspiel, and Bodil Kjer.
Babette's Feast was met with widespread critical acclaim and became the first Danish film to win the Oscar for Best Foreign Language Film. It was also the first Danish cinema film of a Blixen story.
The film premiered in the Un Certain Regard section of the 1987 Cannes Film Festival.

Plot
The elderly and pious Protestant sisters Martine and Filippa live in a small village on the remote western coast of Jutland in 19th-century Denmark. Their late father was a pastor who founded his own Pietistic conventicle. Lacking new converts, the aging sisters preside over a dwindling, elderly congregation.
Forty-nine years before, the sisters had many suitors, but their father rejected them, to retain the women’s assistance with his pastoral mission. Martine was courted by a young Swedish cavalry officer, Lorens Löwenhielm, who was visiting Jutland. Filippa was courted by the famous baritone Achille Papin, on hiatus from the Paris Opera. Both sisters spurned their suitors and stayed with their father.
Thirty-five years later, Babette Hersant appears at their door. She carries a letter from Papin which explains that she is a refugee from counter-revolutionary bloodshed in Paris and recommends her as a housekeeper. The sisters cannot afford to employ Babette, but she begs to work for free. Babette serves as their cook for the next fourteen years, producing improved versions of the bland meals typical of the abstemious nature of the congregation and gaining their respect, and that of the other locals. As the years go by, the sisters are deeply distressed by the increasing number of disputes between the congregants. Babette is also troubled, and at one point, interrupts the arguments with a stern rebuke.
Babette's only link to her former life is a lottery ticket. A Parisian friend annually renews the ticket. One day, she wins the lottery and receives 10,000 francs. After her win she decides to prepare a dinner for the sisters and their small congregation on the occasion of the founding pastor's hundredth birthday. More than just a feast, the meal is an outpouring of Babette's appreciation, an act of self-sacrifice.
The sisters accept both Babette's meal and her offer to pay for the creation of a "real French dinner." Babette arranges for her nephew to go to Paris and gather the supplies for the feast. The ingredients are plentiful, sumptuous and exotic, and their arrival causes much consternation and discussion among the villagers. As the various never-before-seen ingredients arrive and preparations commence, the sisters begin to worry that the meal will become a sin of sensual luxury, if not some form of devilry. In a hasty conference, the sisters and the congregation agree to eat the meal, but to forgo speaking of any pleasure in it and to make no mention of the food during the dinner.
Martine's former suitor, Lorens, now a famous general married to a member of the Queen's court, comes as the guest of his aunt, the local lady of the manor and a member of the old pastor's congregation. He is unaware of the other guests' austere plans and as a man of the world and former attaché in Paris, he is the only person at the table qualified to comment on the meal. He regales the guests with abundant information about the extraordinary food and drink, comparing it to a meal he enjoyed years earlier at the famous Café Anglais in Paris. Although the other celebrants refuse to comment on the earthly pleasures of their meal, Babette's gifts break down their distrust and superstitions, elevating them physically and spiritually. Old wrongs are forgiven, ancient loves are rekindled and a mystical redemption of the human spirit settles over the table.
Bereft, the sisters assume that Babette will return to Paris. However, when she says that all of her money is gone and that she is not going anywhere, the sisters are aghast. Babette then reveals that she was formerly the head chef of the Café Anglais, where a dinner for twelve cost 10,000 francs. Martine tearfully says, "Now you will be poor the rest of your life", to which Babette replies, "An artist is never poor." Filippa then says: "But this is not the end, Babette. In paradise you will be the great artist God meant you to be" and then embraces her with tears in her eyes saying: "Oh, how you will enchant the angels!".

Cast
Production
Blixen's original story takes place in the Norwegian port town of Berlevåg, albeit in an inaccurate setting of multi-coloured wooden houses on a long fjord. However, when Axel researched locations in Norway, he found the settings were too idyllic and resembled a "beautiful tourist brochure". He shifted the location to the flat windswept coast of western Jutland and asked his set designer, Sven Wichmann, to build a small grey village offering very few or no attractions. Mårup Church, a plain Romanesque church built around 1250 on a remote seaside cliff near the village of Lønstrup, was used as a backdrop. Somewhat ironically, the actual village of Berlevåg is not on a fjord, but directly on the Barents Sea, and is subject to strong winds—very much similar to Axel's vision.
Axel altered the setting from a ship-filled harbor to fishermen's rowboats on a beach. He said the changes would highlight Blixen's vision of Babette's life in near complete exile.

There is a lot that works in writing, but when translated to pictures, it doesn't give at all the same impression or feeling. All the changes I undertook, I did to actually be faithful to Karen Blixen. – Gabriel Axel
The Nordisk Film production company suggested the cast of Babette's Feast should include only Danish actors to reduce production costs. However, Axel wanted Danish, Swedish and French actors to play the roles for the sake of authenticity. Axel was supported by the Danish Film Institute's consultant, Claes Kastholm Hansen, who also agreed the cast should include international stars. The title character of Babette was initially offered to Catherine Deneuve. Deneuve was interested in the part but was concerned because she had been criticized in her past attempts to depart from her usual ‘sophisticated woman’ roles. While Deneuve deliberated for a day, Axel met with French actress Stéphane Audran. Axel remembered Audran from her roles in Claude Chabrol's films Violette Nozière (1978) and Cop au Vin (1985). When Axel asked Chabrol (her former husband) about Audran's suitability, Chabrol said Audran was the archetype of Babette. Axel gave the script to Audran, told her that Deneuve was contemplating the role, and asked her if she might be able to respond before the next day. Audran called two hours later and said she wanted the role. The following day, Deneuve declined and Audran was officially cast.
Two other major parts were the characters of the elderly maiden sisters, Phillipa and Martine. Phillipa, the once-promising singer, was portrayed by Bodil Kjer, considered the first lady of Danish theater and namesake of the Bodil Award. Birgitte Federspiel, best known for Carl Dreyer's 1955 classic film Ordet, was cast as the staid, lovelorn Martine.
The role of the Swedish General Lorens Löwenhielm, the former suitor of Martine, was accepted by Jarl Kulle and the Swedish Court Lady by Bibi Andersson. Both had achieved international recognition as two of Ingmar Bergman's favorite actors, appearing in many of his films.
The group of elderly villagers was composed of Danish actors, many of whom were well known for their roles in the films of Carl Theodor Dreyer. These included Lisbeth Movin as the Old Widow, Preben Lerdorff Rye as the Captain, Axel Strøbye as the Driver, Bendt Rothe as Old Nielsen and Ebbe Rode as Christopher.
The popular Danish actress Ghita Nørby was cast as the film's narrator. Although production consultants complained to Axel that the use of a narrator was too old-fashioned, Axel was adamant about using one. He said it was not about being old-fashioned but only about the need: "If there is need for a narrator, then one uses one."

Menu
The seven-course menu in the film consisted of:

"Potage à la Tortue" (turtle soup) served with Amontillado sherry
"Blinis Demidoff" (buckwheat pancakes with caviar and sour cream) served with Veuve Clicquot Champagne
"Cailles en Sarcophage" (quail in puff pastry shell with foie gras and truffle sauce) served with Clos de Vougeot Pinot Noir
An endive salad
"Savarin au Rhum avec des Figues et Fruit Glacée" (rum sponge cake with figs and candied cherries) served with Champagne
Assorted cheeses and fruits served with Sauternes
Coffee with vieux marc Grande Champagne cognac.

Release
Reception
Upon its release in 1987, Babette's Feast received positive reviews. The film won the 1987 Best Foreign Language Film at the [Academy Awards](1120). It also received the BAFTA Film Award for Best Foreign Language Film. In Denmark, it won both the Bodil and Robert awards for Best Danish Film of the Year. The film was nominated and/or won several other awards including a Golden Globe nomination, the Grand Prix (Belgian Film Critics Association) award and a Cannes Film Festival special prize.
The film maintained a 97% "Fresh" rating as of 2024 on Rotten Tomatoes based on 34 reviews, and an average score of 8.5/10. The site's consensus is; "Charming and melancholy, Babette's Feast is a timeless Scandinavian treat that explores the complex relationships between people, beliefs, and what it means to be an artist." The film also has a weighted average score of 78 out of 100 at Metacritic based on reviews from 18 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". After the film's release, several restaurants offered recreations of the film's menu.
The movie is a favorite of Alton Brown, Pope Francis, Rowan Williams, Richard Gere, and Stanley Tucci. The film was included by the Vatican in a list of important films compiled in 1995, under the category of "Religion".

Home video
Babette's Feast was released on DVD by MGM on January 23, 2001, presented in its original 1.85:1 widescreen aspect ratio. The only special feature was the original theatrical trailer.
On July 23, 2013, the film was released by The Criterion Collection on DVD and Blu-ray. The Blu-ray has a new, restored high-definition digital transfer, and features new video interviews with star Stéphane Audran, sociologist Priscilla Parkhurst Ferguson, and a 1995 documentary about author Karen Blixen, as well as a booklet featuring an essay by film scholar Mark Le Fanu and Dinesen's 1950 story.

American remake
In December 2019, it was announced that Alexander Payne had been asked to direct an American remake of the film. Payne's version was planned to be set in Minnesota.

See also
List of submissions to the 60th [Academy Awards](1120) for Best Foreign Language Film
List of Danish submissions for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film

References
Sources
Mørch, Karin (2008). Gabriels gæstebud: portræt af en filmmager (in Danish). Gyldendal A/S. ISBN 978-87-02-06775-0.

Further reading
Curry, Thomas J. (2012). "Babette's Feast and the Goodness of God". Journal of Religion & Film. 16 (2). Archived from the original on February 14, 2013. Alt URL
Goodwin, Sarah Webster (1990). "Knowing better: feminism and utopian discourse in Pride and Prejudice, Villette, and Babette's feast". In Jones, Libby Falk; Goodwin, Sarah McKim Webster (eds.). Feminism, Utopia, and Narrative. Tennessee Studies in Literature. pp. 1–20. ISBN 978-0-87049-636-3.
Podles, Mary Elizabeth (1992). "Babette's Feast: Feasting with Lutherans". The Antioch Review. 50 (3): 551–65. doi:10.2307/4612569. JSTOR 4612569.
Schuler, Jean (1997). "Kierkegaard at Babette's Feast: The Return to the Finite". Journal of Religion and Film. 1 (2). Archived from the original on 2012-12-31. Retrieved 2013-06-16.
Tibbetts, John C., and James M. Welsh, eds. The Encyclopedia of Novels Into Film (2nd ed. 2005) pp 22–23.
Wright, Wendy M. (1997). "Babette's Feast: A Religious Film". Journal of Religion and Film. 1 (2). Archived from the original on 2009-04-16. Retrieved 2009-07-20.

External links
Babette's Feast at IMDb
Babette's Feast at AllMovie
Babette's Feast at the TCM Movie Database
Babette's Feast at Box Office Mojo
Babette's Feast at Rotten Tomatoes
An extensive collection of links about Babette's Feast at KarenBlixen.com
Babettes gæstebud at the Danish Film Institute (in Danish)
Voted #3 on The Arts and Faith Top 100 Films (2010) Archived 2010-04-14 at the Wayback Machine
Babette’s Feast: “Mercy and Truth Have Met Together” an essay by Mark Le Fanu at the Criterion Collection