1771
African diaspora in the Americas
The [African diaspora](1133) in the Americas refers to the people born in the Americas with partial, predominant, or complete sub-Saharan African ancestry. Many are descendants of persons enslaved in Africa and transferred to the Americas by Europeans, then forced to work mostly in European-owned mines and plantations, between the sixteenth and nineteenth centuries.
Significant groups have been established in the [United States](1100) ([African Americans](1132)), in Canada (Black Canadians), in the Caribbean (Afro-Caribbean), and in Latin America (Afro-Latin Americans).

History
After the [United States](1100) achieved independence, next came the independence of Haiti, a country populated almost entirely by people of African descent and the second American colony to win its independence from European colonial powers. After the process of independence, many countries have encouraged European immigration to America, thus reducing the proportion of black and mulatto population throughout the country: Brazil, the [United States](1100), and the Dominican Republic. Miscegenation and more flexible concepts of race have also reduced the overall population identifying as black in Latin America, whereas the one-drop rule in the [United States](1100) has had the opposite effect.
From 21 to 25 November 1995, the Continental Congress of Black Peoples of the Americas was held. Black people still face discrimination in most parts of the continent. According to David D.E. Ferrari, vice president of the World Bank for the Region of Latin America and the Caribbean, black people have lower life expectancy, higher infant mortality, more frequent and more widespread diseases, higher rates of illiteracy and lower income than Americans of different ethnic origin. Women, also the subjects of gender discrimination, suffer worse living conditions.
On 4 November 2008, the first black U.S. president, Barack Obama, won 52% of the vote.  His father was from Kenya and his mother was from Kansas.

Distribution
Notable people of African descent in the Americas
See also
[African-American](1752)
African-Canadian
African-Caribbean
Afro-Latin American

Related bibliography
Ethnic domination and racist discourse in Spain and Latin America. Dijk, Teun A. van. van. Gedisa Editorial SA ISBN 84-7432-997-3
Gender, class and race in Latin America: some contributions. Luna, Lola G. Ed PPU, SA ISBN 84-7665-959-8
Gender, race and class "color" desensientes Latinas. Impoexports, Colombia, Yumbo
Afro Atlantic Histories resource, National Gallery of Art, Washington DC.


== References ==