1785
Traditional African religions
The beliefs and practices of [Africa](1700)n people are highly diverse, and include various ethnic religions. Generally, these traditions are oral rather than scriptural and are passed down from one generation to another through narratives, songs, and festivals. They include beliefs in spirits and higher and lower gods, sometimes including a supreme being, as well as the veneration of the dead, use of magic, and traditional [Africa](1700)n medicine. Most religions can be described as animistic with various polytheistic and pantheistic aspects. The role of humanity is generally seen as one of harmonizing nature with the supernatural.

Spread
Adherents of traditional religions in [Africa](1700) are distributed among 43 countries and are estimated to number over 100 million.
Christianity and Islam, having largely displaced indigenous [Africa](1700)n religions, are often adapted to [Africa](1700)n cultural contexts and belief systems. [Africa](1700)n people often combine the practice of their traditional beliefs with the practice of [Abrahamic religions](1273). These two [Abrahamic religions](1273) are widespread across [Africa](1700), though mostly concentrated in different regions.  Abrahamic religious beliefs, especially monotheistic elements, such as the belief in a single creator god, were introduced into traditionally polytheistic [Africa](1700)n religions rather early. West [Africa](1700)n religions seek to come to terms with reality, and, unlike [Abrahamic religions](1273), are not idealisations. They generally seek to explain the reality of personal experience by spiritual forces which underpin orderly group life, contrasted by those that threaten it.
Followers of traditional [Africa](1700)n religions are also found around the world. In recent times, religions, such as the Yoruba religion and the Odinala religion (a traditional Igbo religion), are on the rise. The religions of the Igbo and Yoruba are popular in the Caribbean and portions of Central and South America. In the [United States](1100), Voodoo is more predominant in the states along the Gulf of Mexico.

Basics
Highly complex animistic beliefs build the core concept of traditional [Africa](1700)n religions. This includes the worship of tutelary deities, nature worship, ancestor worship and the belief in an afterlife, comparable to other traditional religions around the world. While some religions have a pantheistic worldview with a supreme creator god next to other gods and spirits, others follow a purely polytheistic system with various gods, spirits and other supernatural beings. Traditional [Africa](1700)n religions also have elements of totemism, shamanism and veneration of relics.

Traditional [Africa](1700)n religion, like most other ancient traditions around the world, were based on oral traditions. These traditions are not religious principles, but a cultural identity that is passed on through stories, myths and tales, from one generation to the next. The community, one’s family, and the environment, play an important role in one's personal life. Followers believe in the guidance of their ancestors spirits. Among many traditional [Africa](1700)n religions, there are spiritual leaders and kinds of priests. These individuals are essential in the spiritual and religious survival of the community. There are mystics that are responsible for healing and 'divining' - a kind of fortune telling and counseling, similar to shamans. These traditional healers have to be called by ancestors or gods. They undergo strict training and learn many necessary skills, including how to use natural herbs for healing and other, more mystical skills, like the finding of a hidden object without knowing where it is. Traditional [Africa](1700)n religions believe that ancestors maintain a spiritual connection with their living relatives. Most ancestral spirits are generally good and kind. Negative actions taken by ancestral spirits are to cause minor illnesses to warn people that they have gotten onto the wrong path.
Native [Africa](1700)n religions are centered on ancestor worship, the belief in a spirit world, supernatural beings and free will (unlike the later developed concept of faith). Deceased humans (and animals or important objects) still exist in the spirit world and can influence or interact with the physical world. Forms of polytheism was widespread in most of ancient [Africa](1700)n and other regions of the world, before the introduction of Islam, Christianity, and Judaism. An exception was the short-lived monotheistic religion created by Pharaoh Akhenaten, who made it mandatory to pray to his personal god Aten (see Atenism). This remarkable change to traditional Egyptian religion was however reverted by his youngest son, Tutankhamun. High gods, along with other more specialized deities, ancestor spirits, territorial spirits, and beings, are a common theme among traditional [Africa](1700)n religions, highlighting the complex and advanced culture of ancient [Africa](1700).
Some research suggests that certain monotheistic concepts, such as the belief in a high god or force (next to many other gods, deities and spirits, sometimes seen as intermediaries between humans and the creator) were present within [Africa](1700), before the introduction of [Abrahamic religions](1273). These indigenous concepts were different from the monotheism found in [Abrahamic religions](1273).

Traditional [Africa](1700)n medicine is also directly linked to traditional [Africa](1700)n religions. According to Clemmont E. Vontress, the various religious traditions of [Africa](1700) are united by a basic Animism. According to him, the belief in spirits and ancestors is the most important element of [Africa](1700)n religions. Gods were either self-created or evolved from spirits or ancestors which got worshiped by the people. He also notes that most modern [Africa](1700)n folk religions were strongly influenced by non-[Africa](1700)n religions, mostly Christianity and Islam and thus may differ from the ancient forms.
Traditional [Africa](1700)n religions generally hold the beliefs of life after death (a spirit world or realms, in which spirits, but also gods reside), with some also having a concept of reincarnation, in which deceased humans may reincarnate into their family lineage (blood lineage), if they want to, or have something to do.
There are often similarities between traditional [Africa](1700)n religions located in the same subregion. Central [Africa](1700), for instance, has similar religious traditions in countries of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Republic of the Congo, Rwanda, Burundi, Zambia, and Malawi. The people in these countries who follow traditional religious practices often venerate ancestors through rituals and worship the land or a "divinity" through "regional cults" or "shrine cults", respectively.
Jacob Olupona, Nigerian American professor of indigenous [Africa](1700)n religions at Harvard University, summarized the many traditional [Africa](1700)n religions as complex animistic religious traditions and beliefs of the [Africa](1700)n people before the Christian and Islamic "colonization" of [Africa](1700). Ancestor veneration has always played a "significant" part in the traditional [Africa](1700)n cultures and may be considered as central to the [Africa](1700)n worldview. Ancestors (ancestral ghosts/spirits) are an integral part of reality. The ancestors are generally believed to reside in an ancestral realm (spiritworld), while some believe that the ancestors became equal in power to deities.

The defining line between deities and ancestors is often contested, but overall, ancestors are believed to occupy a higher level of existence than living human beings and are believed to be able to bestow either blessings or illness upon their living descendants.
Ancestors can offer advice and bestow good fortune and honor to their living descendants, but they can also make demands, such as insisting that their shrines be properly maintained and propitiated. A belief in ancestors also testifies to the inclusive nature of traditional [Africa](1700)n spirituality by positing that deceased progenitors still play a role in the lives of their living descendants.
Olupona rejects the western/Islamic definition of monotheism and says that such concepts could not reflect the complex [Africa](1700)n traditions and are too simplistic. While some traditions have a supreme being (next to other deities), others have not. Monotheism does not reflect the multiplicity of ways that the traditional [Africa](1700)n spirituality has conceived of deities, gods, and spirit beings. He summarizes that traditional [Africa](1700)n religions are not only religions, but a worldview, a way of life.

Ceremonies
West and Central [Africa](1700)n religious practices generally manifest themselves in communal ceremonies or divinatory rites in which members of the community, overcome by force (or ashe, nyama, etc.), are excited to the point of going into meditative trance in response to rhythmic or driving drumming or singing. One religious ceremony practiced in Gabon and Cameroon is the Okuyi, practiced by several Bantu ethnic groups. In this state, depending upon the region, drumming or instrumental rhythms played by respected musicians (each of which is unique to a given deity or ancestor), participants embody a deity or ancestor, energy or state of mind by performing distinct ritual movements or dances which further enhance their elevated consciousness.
When this trance-like state is witnessed and understood, adherents are privy to a way of contemplating the pure or symbolic embodiment of a particular mindset or frame of reference. This builds skills at separating the feelings elicited by this mindset from their situational manifestations in daily life. Such separation and subsequent contemplation of the nature and sources of pure energy or feelings serves to help participants manage and accept them when they arise in mundane contexts. This facilitates better control and transformation of these energies into positive, culturally appropriate behavior, thought, and speech.  Also, this practice can give rise to those in these trances uttering words which, when interpreted by a culturally educated initiate or diviner, can provide insight into appropriate directions which the community (or individual) might take in accomplishing its goal.

Spirits
Followers of traditional [Africa](1700)n religions pray to various spirits as well as to their ancestors. This includes also nature, elementary, and animal spirits. The difference between powerful spirits and gods is often minimal. Most [Africa](1700)n societies believe in several “high gods” and a large amount of lower gods and spirits. There are also some religions with a single supreme being (Chukwu, Nyame, Olodumare, Ngai, Roog, etc.). Some recognize a dual god and goddess such as Mawu-Lisa.
Traditional [Africa](1700)n religions generally believe in an afterlife, one or more Spirit worlds. Ancestor worship is an important basic concept in nearly all [Africa](1700)n religions. Some [Africa](1700)n religions adopted different views through the influence of Islam or even Hinduism.

Practices and rituals
There are more similarities than differences between all traditional [Africa](1700)n religions, although Jacob Olupona has written that it is difficult to truly generalize them because of the sheer amount of differences and variations between the traditions. The deities and spirits are honored through libation or sacrifice of animals, vegetables, cooked food, flowers, semi-precious stones, or precious metals. The will of the gods or spirits is sought by the believer also through consultation of divinities or divination. Traditional [Africa](1700)n religions embrace natural phenomena – ebb and tide, waxing and waning moon, rain and drought – and the rhythmic pattern of agriculture. According to Gottlieb and Mbiti: The environment and nature are infused in every aspect of traditional [Africa](1700)n religions and culture. This is largely because cosmology and beliefs are intricately intertwined with the natural phenomena and environment. All aspects of weather, thunder, lightning, rain, day, moon, sun, stars, and so on may become amenable to control through the cosmology of [Africa](1700)n people. Natural phenomena are responsible for providing people with their daily needs.
For example, in the Serer religion, one of the most sacred stars in the cosmos is called Yoonir (the Star of Sirius). With a long farming tradition, the Serer high priests and priestesses (Saltigue) deliver yearly sermons at the Xooy Ceremony (divination ceremony) in Fatick before Yoonir's phase in order to predict winter months and enable farmers to start planting.
Traditional healers are common in most areas, and their practices include a religious element to varying degrees.

Divination
Since [Africa](1700) is a large continent with many ethnic groups and cultures, there is not one single technique of casting divination. The practice of casting may be done with small objects, such as bones, cowrie shells, stones, strips of leather, or flat pieces of wood.

Some castings are done using sacred divination plates made of wood or performed on the ground (often within a circle).
In traditional [Africa](1700)n societies, many people seek out diviners on a regular basis. There are generally no prohibitions against the practice. Diviners (also known as priests) are sought for their wisdom as counselors in life and for their knowledge of herbal medicine.

Ubuntu
Ubuntu is an Nguni Bantu term meaning "humanity". It is part of a concept sometimes translated as "I am because we are" (also "I am because you are"), or "humanity towards others" (in Zulu, umuntu ngumuntu ngabantu). In Xhosa, the latter term is used, but is often meant in a more philosophical sense to mean "the belief in a universal bond of sharing that connects all humanity". It is a collection of values and practices that people of [Africa](1700) or of [Africa](1700)n origin view as making people authentic human beings. While the nuances of these values and practices vary across different ethnic groups, they all point to one thing – an authentic individual human being is part of a larger and more significant relational, communal, societal, environmental and spiritual world.

Virtue and vice
Virtue in traditional [Africa](1700)n religion is often connected with carrying out communal obligations. Examples include social behaviors such as the respect for parents and elders, raising children appropriately, providing hospitality, and being honest, trustworthy, and courageous.
In some traditional [Africa](1700)n religions, morality is associated with obedience or disobedience to God regarding the way a person or a community lives. For the Kikuyu, according to their primary supreme creator, Ngai, acting through the lesser deities is believed to speak to and be capable of guiding the virtuous person as one's conscience.
In many cases, [Africa](1700)ns who have converted to other religions have still kept up their traditional customs and practices, combining them in a syncretic way.

Sacred places
Some sacred or holy locations for traditional religions include but not limited to Nri-Igbo, the Point of Sangomar, Yaboyabo, Fatick, Ife, Oyo, Dahomey, Benin City, Ouidah, Nsukka, Kanem-Bornu, Igbo-Ukwu, and Tulwap Kipsigis, among others.

Relations with other faiths
Traditional [Africa](1700)n religions have interacted with other major world religions in various ways, ranging from syncretism and coexistence to conflict and competition. These interactions have significantly shaped the religious landscape in [Africa](1700).

Interaction with Christianity
The introduction of Christianity by European missionaries brought profound changes to the religious practices in [Africa](1700). While some communities fully embraced Christianity, others blended Christian teachings with their traditional beliefs, leading to syncretic practices. For example, in parts of West [Africa](1700), certain Christian denominations incorporate traditional rituals and symbols into their worship, reflecting the enduring influence of traditional [Africa](1700)n religions.

Interaction with Islam
Islam's spread across North and West [Africa](1700) also had a significant impact on traditional [Africa](1700)n religions. Traditional [Africa](1700)n religions and Islam have coexisted for centuries, often blending elements of Islamic belief with traditional practices. In regions like Senegal and Mali, Sufi Islam often integrates aspects of local spiritual practices, reflecting a deep synergy between traditional [Africa](1700)n religions and Islamic mysticism.

Coexistence, Syncretism, and Conflict
In contemporary [Africa](1700), many people identify with both traditional [Africa](1700)n religions and either Christianity or Islam, practicing elements of both in a form of religious duality. This syncretism is evident in rituals, festivals, and the spiritual lives of individuals who draw on the strengths of both their indigenous traditions and the newer religions. However, tensions have arisen, particularly where aggressive proselytism by Christian or Islamic groups has sought to replace traditional [Africa](1700)n religions entirely. These tensions have sometimes led to the marginalization of traditional [Africa](1700)n religions, though it continues to play a vital role in the cultural and spiritual life of many [Africa](1700)n communities.

Religious persecution
Traditional [Africa](1700)n religions have faced persecution from Christians and Muslims. Adherents of these religions have been forcefully converted to Islam and Christianity, demonized and marginalized. The atrocities include killings, waging war, destroying of sacred places, and other atrocities.
Because of persecution and discrimination, as well as incompatibility with traditional society, culture and native beliefs, the Dinka people largely rejected or ignored Islamic and Christian teachings.

Science and traditional worldviews
Bandama and Babalola (2023) states:

The view of science as "embedded practice," intimately connected with ritual, for example, is considered "ascientific," "pseudo-science," or "magic" in Western perspective. In [Africa](1700), there is a strong connection between the physical and the terrestrial worlds. The deities and gods are the emissaries of the supreme God and the patrons in charge of the workability of the processes involved. In the Ile-Ife pantheon, for example, Olokun – the goddess of wealth – is considered the patron of the glass industry and is therefore consulted. Sacrifices are offered to appease her for a successful run. The same is true for ironworking. Current scholarship has reinforced the contributions of ancient [Africa](1700) to the global history of science and technology.

Traditions by region
This list is limited to a few well-known traditions.

Central [Africa](1700)
Bantu mythology (Central, Southeast, Southern [Africa](1700))
Bushongo mythology (Congo)
Kongo religion (Congo)
Lugbara mythology (Congo)
Baluba mythology (Congo)
Mbuti mythology (Congo)
Hausa animism (Chad, Gabon)
Lotuko mythology (South Sudan)

East [Africa](1700)
Kushite mythology (central parts of Sudan with origins in kerma culture)
Bantu mythology (Central, Southeast, Southern [Africa](1700))
Gikuyu mythology (Kenya)
Akamba mythology
Abaluhya mythology (Kenya)
Dinka religion (South Sudan)
Malagasy mythology (Madagascar)
Maasai mythology (Kenya, Tanzania, Ouebian)
Kalenjin mythology (Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania)
Dini Ya Msambwa (Bungoma, Trans Nzoia, Kenya)
Waaqeffanna (Ethiopia and Kenya)
Somali mythology (Somalia)

Northern [Africa](1700)
Ancient Egyptian religion (Egypt, Sudan)
Kemetism
Kushite mythology (along the Nile valley in Egypt and Sudan)
Punic religion (Tunisia, Algeria, Libya)
Traditional Berber religion (Morocco (including Western Sahara), Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, Mauritania, Mali, Niger, Chad, Burkina Faso)

Southern [Africa](1700)
Bantu mythology (Central, Southeast, Southern [Africa](1700))
Lozi mythology (Zambia)
Tumbuka mythology (Malawi)
Zulu traditional religion (South [Africa](1700))
Badimo (South [Africa](1700), Botswana, Lesotho)
San religion (Botswana, Namibia, and South [Africa](1700))
Traditional healers of South [Africa](1700)
Indigenous religion in Zimbabwe

West [Africa](1700)
Abwoi religion (Nigeria)
Akan religion (Ghana, Ivory Coast)
Dahomean religion (Benin, Togo)
Efik religion (Nigeria, Cameroon)
Edo religion (Benin kingdom, Nigeria)
Hausa animism (Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Gana/Ghana, Ivory Coast, Niger, Nigeria, Togo)
Ijaw religion (Ijo people, Nigeria)
Godianism (a religion that is purported to encompass all traditional religions of [Africa](1700), primarily based on Odinala)
Odinala (Igbo people, Nigeria)
Asaase Yaa (Bono people (Gana/Ghana and Ivory Coast)
Serer religion (A ƭat Roog) (Senegal, Gambia, Mauritania)
Yoruba religion (Nigeria, Benin, Togo)
Vodou (Gana/Ghana, Benin, Togo, Nigeria)
Dogon religion (Mali)
Ifa religion(Nigeria)

[Africa](1700)n diaspora
Afro-American religions involve ancestor worship and include a creator deity along with a pantheon of divine spirits such as the Orisha, Loa, Vodun, Nkisi and Alusi, among others. In addition to the religious syncretism of these various [Africa](1700)n traditions, many also incorporate elements of Folk Catholicism including folk saints and other forms of folk religion, Native American religion, Spiritism, Spiritualism, Shamanism (sometimes including the use of Entheogens) and European folklore.
Various "doctoring" spiritual traditions also exist such as Obeah and Hoodoo which focus on spiritual health. [Africa](1700)n religious traditions in the Americas can vary. They can have non-prominent [Africa](1700)n roots or can be almost wholly [Africa](1700)n in nature, such as religions like Trinidad Orisha.

See also
Folk religion – Expressions of religion distinct from the official doctrines of organized religion
Witchcraft in [Africa](1700)

Notes
References
Information presented here was gleaned from World Eras Encyclopaedia, Volume 10, edited by Pierre-Damien Mvuyekure (New York: Thomson-Gale, 2003), in particular pp. 275–314.
Baldick, J (1997) Black God: The Afroasiatic Roots of the Jewish, Christian, and Muslim Religions. New York: Syracuse University Press.
Doumbia, A. & Doumbia, N (2004) The Way of the Elders: West [Africa](1700)n Spirituality & Tradition. Saint Paul, MN: Llewellyn Publications.
Ehret, Christopher, (2002)  Civilizations of [Africa](1700): a History to 1800. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.
Ehret, Christopher, An [Africa](1700)n Classical Age: Eastern and Southern [Africa](1700) in World History, 1000 B.C. to A.D. 400, page 159, University of Virginia Press, ISBN 0-8139-2057-4
Karade, B (1994) The Handbook of Yoruba Religious Concepts. York Beach, MA: Samuel Weiser Inc.
P'Bitek, Okot. [Africa](1700)n Religions and Western Scholarship. Kampala: East [Africa](1700)n Literature Bureau, 1970.
Princeton Online, History of [Africa](1700)
Wiredu, Kwasi Toward Decolonizing [Africa](1700)n Philosophy And Religion in [Africa](1700)n Studies Quarterly, The Online Journal for [Africa](1700)n Studies, Volume 1, Issue 4, 1998

Further reading
Encyclopedia of [Africa](1700)n Religion, - Molefi Asante, Sage Publications, 2009 ISBN 1412936365
Abimbola, Wade (ed. and trans., 1977). Ifa Divination Poetry NOK, New York).
Baldick, Julian (1997). Black God: the Afroasiatic roots of the Jewish, Christian, and Muslim religions. Syracuse University Press:ISBN 0-8156-0522-6
Barnes, Sandra. [Africa](1700)'s Ogun: Old World and New (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1989).
Beier, Ulli, ed. The Origins of Life and Death: [Africa](1700)n Creation Myths (London: Heinemann, 1966).
Bowen, P.G. (1970). Sayings of the Ancient One - Wisdom from Ancient [Africa](1700). Theosophical Publishing House, U.S.
Chidester, David. "Religions of South [Africa](1700)" pp. 17–19
Cole, Herbert Mbari. Art and Life among the Owerri Igbo (Bloomington: Indiana University press, 1982).
Danquah, J. B., The Akan Doctrine of God: A Fragment of Gold Coast Ethics and Religion, second edition (London: Cass, 1968).
Einstein, Carl. [Africa](1700)n Legends, First English Edition, Pandavia, Berlin 2021. ISBN 9783753155821
Gbadagesin, Segun. [Africa](1700)n Philosophy: Traditional Yoruba Philosophy and Contemporary [Africa](1700)n Realities (New York: Peter Lang, 1999).
Gleason, Judith. Oya, in Praise of an [Africa](1700)n Goddess (Harper Collins, 1992).
Griaule, Marcel; Dietterlen, Germaine. Le Mythe Cosmogonique (Paris: Institut d'Ethnologie, 1965).
Idowu, Bolaji, God in Yoruba Belief (Plainview: Original Publications, rev. and enlarged ed., 1995)
LaGamma, Alisa (2000). Art and oracle: [Africa](1700)n art and rituals of divination. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. ISBN 978-0-87099-933-8. Archived from the original on 2013-05-10.
Lugira, Aloysius Muzzanganda. [Africa](1700)n traditional religion. Infobase Publishing, 2009.
Mbiti, John. [Africa](1700)n Religions and Philosophy (1969) [Africa](1700)n Writers Series, Heinemann ISBN 0-435-89591-5
Opoku, Kofi Asare (1978). West [Africa](1700)n Traditional Religion Kofi Asare Opoku | Publisher: FEP International Private Limited. ASIN: B0000EE0IT
Parrinder, Geoffrey. [Africa](1700)n Traditional Religion, Third ed. (London: Sheldon Press, 1974). ISBN 0-85969-014-8 pbk.
Parrinder, Geoffrey. "Traditional Religion", in his [Africa](1700)'s Three Religions, Second ed. (London: Sheldon Press, 1976, ISBN 0-85969-096-2), p. 15-96.
Peavy, D., (2009)."Kings, Magic & Medicine". Raleigh, NC: SI.
Peavy, D., (2016). The Benin Monarchy, Olokun & Iha Ominigbon. Umewaen: Journal of Benin & Edoid Studies: Osweego, NY.
Popoola, S. Solagbade. Ikunle Abiyamo: It is on Bent Knees that I gave Birth (2007 Asefin Media Publication)
Soyinka, Wole, Myth, Literature and the [Africa](1700)n World (Cambridge University Press, 1976).
Alice Werner, Myths and Legends of the Bantu (1933). Available online at sacred-texts.com
Umeasigbu, Rems Nna. The Way We Lived: Ibo Customs and Stories (London: Heinemann, 1969).

External links

 Media related to Traditional [Africa](1700)n religions at Wikimedia Commons
[Africa](1700)n Comparative Belief
Afrika world.net A website with extensive links and information about traditional [Africa](1700)n religions Archived 2019-06-01 at the Wayback Machine
culture-exchange.blog/animism-modern-africa An article explaining the parallels between traditional and modern religious practices in [Africa](1700)