1895
Beaches of Cape Town
The Cape Metropole (greater [Cape Town](1800)) has a wide variety of beaches divided into three regions by the Cape Peninsula:

False Bay, including the long sandy beach running from Gordon's Bay to Muizenberg, and the smaller beaches along the East side of the Cape Peninsula
Atlantic Seaboard, along the West (Atlantic) side of the Cape Peninsula
Blaauwberg/West Coast, along the Blaauwberg coast running Northwards from [Cape Town](1800)
The sea in False Bay is about 6 degrees warmer than the Atlantic Seaboard and the West Coast.
In 2011, Lonely Planet listed [Cape Town](1800) second in its list of the world's top 10 beach cities.

False Bay
A long sandy beach runs more or less uninterrupted for the complete width of False Bay from Muizenberg to Gordon's Bay, forming the coast of the Cape Flats. Along the rocky Cape Peninsula, there are several smaller beaches below the mountains which are more protected from westerly swells than the beaches of the north shore. There is also a long sandy beach on the east side of the bay at the foot of the Kogelberg.

Buffels Bay, Cape Peninsula
Smitswinkel Bay
Fishermans Beach
Froggy Pond
Windmill Beach 34°12′04″S 18°27′24″E is a small sandy beach below the golf course at Froggy Pond, Simon's Town. It is surrounded by large rounded granite boulders, and has two small coves separated by a group of large boulders. The south cove is relatively narrow and deeper, and opens to the bay towards the east. The north cove is wider, shallower and very protected from swell. It is a safe swimming area. The south cove is a popular site for scuba diving and is often used for entry-level training as the water is protected and entry and exit are easy.
Boulders Beach
Long Beach, Simon's Town
Glencairn
Fish Hoek
Kalk Bay
St James
Muizenberg
Strandfontein
Monwabisi Beach, Khayelitsha
Macassar beach
Strand
Gordon's Bay
Kogelbaai, south of Gordon's Bay

West coast of the Cape Peninsula
The Atlantic side of the Cape Peninsula faces West and thus is popular for expensive homes facing the sunset views. There are many beautiful beaches below the mountains of the peninsula.

Scarborough
Crayfish factory Beach (Witsands Beach)
Kommetjie
Noordhoek
Hout Bay
Sandy Bay
Llandudno
Camps Bay
Glen Beach
Clifton
Sea Point

West Coast
The West Coast beaches are long, sandy beaches to the North of [Cape Town](1800). The wind and surf conditions make these beaches popular for surfing and kite-surfing.

Milnerton
Sunset Beach
Melkbosstrand
Bloubergstrand


== References ==