1935
Beach rugby
Beach rugby is a sport that is based on rugby union. Currently there is not a centralized regulation of the sport as in beach soccer or beach volleyball, but leagues are common across [Europe](1994). The sport is particularly popular in Italy, in the Balkan region and in [Eastern [Europe](1994)](1985). Casual games are played around the world using different sets of rules. However, organized leagues use a field that is only a fraction of the size of a standard rugby field, far fewer players on each team, shorter matches, and a simplified scoring system. Two popular tournaments in the United States are the 7s By The Sea tournament, held in Corpus Christi, Texas each summer, and The Beerfoot 7s tournament, played in Fort Myers Beach, Florida on the last weekend of July. 
The inaugural [Europe](1994)an Beach Five Rugby Championships was held in Moscow in 2017 and is being held there since then.

Rules
In Beach rugby, rucks, mauls, scrums, gang tackles, kicks above waist heights, lineouts are outlawed.

Field dimensions
The size of a beach rugby field depends on the decision of the league. The field is between 30 and 50 metres long and 20–35 metres wide, and the in-goals are 3–7 metres deep. There are no goalposts on the field, and the lines are usually marked with some sort of tape or rope.

Number of players
Depending on the league and the field size, either 4 or 7 players are allowed on the field for one team at once. Between 3 and 7 reserves are allowed, again, depending on the league. Substitutions are often done "on-the-fly," similar to ice hockey or futsal.

The ball
A standard rugby ball is used, but many leagues will use a size 4 ball instead of size 5, the size used in all levels of field rugby above youth. A rugby ball is oval-shaped and made of synthetic leather panels that have small dimples to enhance handling.

Scoring
Most leagues use a "one try, one point" scoring system, since there are no goalposts on the field. Occasionally, a sudden-death extra time period is used to resolve matches drawn at the end of regulation, but not all leagues use this rule.
One Italian league used a system where the in-goals were divided into five equal rectangles. A try scored from the outer rectangles was worth 3 points, from the central rectangle was 5 points, and from either of the two intermediate rectangles was worth 4 points. However, there is no evidence that this league still exists. The Ameland Beach Rugby Festival www.beachrugby.nl(The Netherlands) also uses this system.

Timing
Leagues use either two 5 or 7 minute halves (with a 1 or 3 minute interval for halftime) as the length of a single match. Extra time may be played if the league in question calls for it.

[Europe](1994)an Beach Five Rugby Championships
Men
Women
See also
Touch rugby
Snow rugby
Rugby union
Rugby league
[Beach handball](1934)
[Beach soccer](1936)
[Beach volleyball](1937)

References
External links

This is SUPER BEACH5's RUGBY - 5-at-side, contact beachfives rugby
E.B.R.A. - [Europe](1994)an Beach Rugby Association