2071
Cheltenham College
Cheltenham College is a public school (fee-charging boarding and day school for pupils aged 13–18) in Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, England. The school opened in 1841 as a Church of England foundation and is known for its linguistic, military, and sporting traditions.

History
Two Cheltenham residents, G. S. Harcourt and J. S. Iredell, founded the college in July 1841 to educate the sons of gentlemen. The plan to establish a "Proprietary Grammar School" had been agreed at a meeting of residents at Harcourt's home on 9 November 1840.: 1  It originally opened in three houses along Bays Hill Terrace in the centre of the town.
Within two years it had moved to its present site, with Boyne House as the first College Boarding House, and soon became known simply as Cheltenham College. Accepting both boarding and day boys, it was divided into Classical and Military sides until the mid-20th century. The 1893 book Great Public Schools by E. S. Skirving, S. R. James, and Henry Churchill Maxwell Lyte contained a chapter on each of what they considered England's ten greatest public schools; it included a chapter on Cheltenham College. The college is now an independent fee paying school, governed by Cheltenham College Council. A few girls were admitted in 1969. In 1981 the first girls' house opened and the Sixth Form became fully co-educational. In 1998, girls were admitted to all other years.
In 1865, a Junior Department was added to the main College buildings. In 1993 it opened its doors to girls and also opened a pre-Prep department, Kingfishers, for 3- to 7-year-olds.

Student body
Cheltenham has approximately 720 pupils (a fifth being day pupils) between the ages of 13 and 18. The fees are between approximately £34,000–£46,500 per annum, making it amongst the most expensive schools in the United Kingdom. The school claims to have a strong academic reputation, with the majority of pupils going to The Russell Group Universities, and around 7% going on to Oxford and Cambridge universities. Both GCSE and A Level results are among the highest in Gloucestershire.

Military tradition
In the First World War 702 Old Cheltonians (former pupils) were killed in the service of their country, and a further 363 died in World War II. Cheltenham is one of only three schools in England to have its own military colours (last presented in 2000 by The Princess Royal). (The others are Eton College and the Duke of York's Royal Military School.)

Combined Cadet Force (CCF)
Cheltenham College has an affiliate tri-service Combined Cadet Force which has a history dating back to 1862. 
Cheltenham College CCF (Army Section) is attached to the Rifles Regiment, and consequently Army cadets' berets have the Rifles Bugle as their cap badge.

Sport
Rugby
The Rugby club dates back to 1844. Cheltenham competes with larger single gender schools. The first inter-school rugby football match was played between Rugby School and Cheltenham College, Cheltenham beating Rugby. The "Cheltenham Rules" were adopted by the Rugby Football Union in 1887. Cheltenham's rugby XV was undefeated in the 1957, 2008 and 2017 seasons. Eddie Butler, former Welsh, Barbarian and British Lions International Rugby player, taught French at the school. The schools Director of Rugby is former Gloucester Rugby and England Rugby player Olly Morgan.

Rowing
The Boat Club was founded in 1841. The Boat House itself is located at the foot of Tewkesbury Abbey on the banks of the River Severn. Key events in the rowing calendar are; Schools' Head of the River Race, The National Schools Regatta and Henley Royal Regatta. At the 2013 National School's Head of River, the 1st IV+ came first in their division.

Rackets
Cheltenham College plays Rackets. At times, they have dominated the Queen's Club Public Schools Competition: Cheltenham have been National Champions three times from 2003 to 2011. Chris Stout won the Foster Cup (the individual championship for public schools) at Queen's Club in December 2011. The current World Champion, Jamie Stout (Chris's brother), is an Old Cheltonian as well.

Polo
Cheltenham were National Schools Champions in 1997, 1998, 2004, & 2005 and Arena Champions in 2004, 2005, and 2006.

Cricket
Cheltenham has a longstanding tradition of cricket and is the home of the Cheltenham Cricket Festival. Gloucestershire County Cricket Club played its first game at the College cricket ground in 1872, making this the longest running cricket festival on an out-ground, in the world.

In popular culture and media
Cheltenham College was used to film the majority of the school scenes in the popular 1968 British film If...., starring Malcolm McDowell, although an agreement between the school's then Headmaster, David Ashcroft, and the film's director, Lindsay Anderson (who was a former pupil and Senior Prefect), prevented the filmmakers from crediting the school. Additional interior scenes were filmed at [Aldenham School](2015) in Hertfordshire, which gained sole accreditation in the film's closing credit.

Old Cheltonians
See List of Cheltenham College alumni

Principals, headmasters and head
The current head of Cheltenham College is Nicola Huggett.
The full list of past principals and heads is contained in Cheltenham College Who's Who 5th edition, 2003, and is as follows:

See also
Cheltonian Society
College Ground, Cheltenham
Thirlestaine House
List of people educated at Cheltenham College
Cheltenham Ladies' College

References
Bibliography
Cheltenham College: The First Hundred Years by Michael C. Morgan Chalfont St. Giles: Richard Sadler, for the Cheltonian Society, 1968. A formal history, starting with the meeting on 9 November 1840 of Cheltenham residents (presided over by Major-General George Swiney) who decided to set up a 'Proprietary Grammar School' and appointed a committee to achieve this. ISBN unknown/unavailable.
Then & Now: An Anniversary Celebration of Cheltenham College 1841–1991 by Tim Pearce, (Cheltonian Society, 1991). The author explains in the Preface that this is "more of a scrap book than a formal history, and like all scrap books it reflects the tastes and interests of its compilers and depends on what in the way of pictures and documents may be available to them". ISBN 0-85967-875-X
Cheltenham College Who's Who, 5th edition ed. John Bowes, (Cheltonian Society, 2003) No ISBN on book.
Floreat, A collection of photographs of College life from the 1960s and early 1970s compiled by the late M.F. Miller, a Physics master at the school

External links

Cheltenham College website