212
Aksaray Malaklisi
The Aksaray Malaklısı or Malaklı Karabaş is a breed of large livestock guardian dog, from the Aksaray Province in central Anatolia, part of Turkey. They are also known as the Turkish Mastiff or Anatolian Lion.
The breed has become an increasingly popular livestock guardian dog across the world. It is recognized by the Turkish Dog Federation.

History
The Aksaray Malaklısı is named for the Aksaray Province in Central Anatolia, where oral tradition reports it was brought by Sumerians 3,500 years ago. The Aksaray Malaklısı Breed Improvement Association claims that the breed is one of the oldest in the world, with a 3,500 year history in Anatolia. According to oral tradition, the Aksaray Malaklisi was used as a war dog by the Assyrians 2500 years ago.
Genetic analysis has shown it to be a distinct breed from other Turkish livestock guardian dog breeds, including the Kangal, [Akbash](210) and Kars.
The "malakli" part of the breed name is said to be due to their pendulous jowls.

Characteristics
Appearance
The Aksaray Malaklısı usually stands between 70 and 85 centimetres (28 and 33 in) at the withers and weighs between 60 and 85 kilograms (132 and 187 lb), with a body length of some 79 and 83 centimetres (31 and 33 in). It is typically grey in colour with a black mask; the coat is short. The head and ears are large, the jowls are pendulous, and the tail is straight.

Behavior
The dogs only obey commands from the master, and can be aggressive with other people. They typically do not tolerate working with other dogs of the same sex.

Health
Their lifespan is 13–15 years.

Use
The Aksaray Malaklısı is used in its homeland to protect flocks of sheep from predators, especially wolves. A pair of Aksaray Malaklısı, always a male and a female, can protect some 700-800 sheep.
They have also gained worldwide popularity as home guard dogs.
The Aksaray Malaklısı Breed Improvement Association (AKMID) has claimed the breed was used as a war dog by the Assyrians over 2500 years ago.


== References ==