2302
73rd Golden Globe Awards
The 73rd Golden Globe Awards honored the best in film and American television of 2015. It was broadcast live on January 10, 2016, from The Beverly Hilton in Beverly Hills, California beginning at 5:00 p.m. PST / 8:00 p.m. EST by NBC. The ceremony was produced by Dick Clark Productions in association with the Hollywood Foreign Press Association. The nominations were announced on December 10, 2015, at The Beverly Hilton by Angela Bassett, America Ferrera, Chloë Grace Moretz, and Dennis Quaid. Denzel Washington was announced as the Cecil B. DeMille Lifetime Achievement Award honoree on November 16, 2015. Ricky Gervais hosted the show for the fourth time. The Martian, Mozart in the Jungle, Mr. Robot, The Revenant, and Steve Jobs were among the films and television shows that received multiple awards.

Winners and nominees
These are the nominees for the 73rd Golden Globe Awards. Winners are listed at the top of each list.

Film
Films with multiple nominations
The following 16 films received multiple nominations:

Films with multiple wins
The following 3 films received multiple wins:

Television
Series with multiple nominations
The following 13 series received multiple nominations:

Series with multiple wins
The following 2 series received multiple wins:

Presenters
The Hollywood Foreign Press announced the following presenters:

Reception
The show received mixed to negative reviews, with the critics panning host Ricky Gervais's jokes as well as lack of energy in ceremony. Writing for The Washington Post, Hank Stuever heavily criticised the ceremony saying, "We ask for the worst, so we get the worst", and went on to say "Gervais acted like he was the one being made to suffer, but truly this misery is shared all around." Daniel D'Addario of Time's also felt that the show was a "bore" and said, "By the Globes' own standard, this year's show felt unbearably bogged down." However, The New York Times' James Poniewozik reviewed the ceremony moderately saying: "A well-run, fun Globes — privileged people toasting their terrific success with bottomless Moët — is its own corrective to Hollywood self-seriousness. Whereas the planned transgression of this one was less a stiff shot than small beer." The ceremony was nominated for the Writers Guild of America Award for Best Comedy/Variety (Music, Awards, Tributes) – Specials, but lost out to Triumph's Election Special 2016.

Ratings
The ceremony averaged a Nielsen 5.5 ratings/13 share, and was watched by 18.5 million viewers. The ratings was an eleven percent decline from the previous ceremony's viewership of 19.3 million, the second highest in a decade.

See also
21st Critics' Choice Awards
22nd Screen Actors Guild Awards
36th Golden Raspberry Awards
69th British Academy Film Awards
88th Academy Awards

References
External links
Official website
Golden Globes 2016
73rd Golden Globe Awards at IMDb
73rd Golden Globe Awards at Rotten Tomatoes