2558
Comarques of Catalonia
The comarques of [Catalonia](2549) (singular comarca, Eastern Catalan: kuˈmarkə, Western Catalan: koˈmaɾka), often referred to in English as counties, are an administrative division of [Catalonia](2549). Each comarca comprises a number of municipalities, roughly equivalent to a county in the United States. Currently, [Catalonia](2549) is divided into 42 comarques and Aran, considered a "unique territorial entity" and not a comarca.
Each comarca has a representative county council (Catalan: consell comarcal), except for Barcelonès, which abolished it in 2019, and Aran, which instead has the Conselh Generau d'Aran.
Comarques form the second-level administrative division within [Catalonia](2549), being a subdivision of vegueries (or provinces at state level).

Overview
Although today the comarques are officially defined under a Catalan parliamentary act, for centuries they had existed unofficially, with citizens identifying with a particular comarca in the same way that people in other parts of the world might identify with a particular region.
In some cases, comarques consist of rural areas and many small villages centring on an important town, where the people of the region traditionally go to shop or to sell their goods. This is the case of comarques such as the Pla de l'Estany, centred on the town of Banyoles, or the Ripollès, centred on the town of Ripoll. In other cases, comarques are larger areas with many important population centres that have traditionally been considered part of the same region, as in the case of the Empordà or Vallès.
The current official division of [Catalonia](2549) into comarques originates in an order of the autonomous Catalan government under the Spanish Republic in 1936. It was superseded after the 1939 victory of Francisco Franco's forces in the Spanish Civil War, but restored in 1987 by the re-established Generalitat of [Catalonia](2549). Since the definition of comarques is sometimes ambiguous, many new proposals have been made since the comarques were first officially designated as attempts to modify the official distribution with what some regions consider to be a traditional comarca. As a result, some revisions to the official division have been made, such as the additions of Moianès and Lluçanès to the map, in 2015 and 2023 respectively.
Comarques exist as a local government area, and have a representative county council. They are often known as counties in the English language, but this can be confused with the counties that were ruled by counts.
Borders of comarques generally do not cross those of the state-level provinces ([Barcelona](1000), Girona, Lleida, Tarragona), since the provinces are defined by the Spanish government, while comarques are defined by the Catalan government - notably in the case of Cerdanya which is split into two between the provinces of Lleida and Girona (most other cases involve only one or two municipalities).
Aran, which is included here, is officially not a comarca but a "unique territorial entity" with additional powers. Its current status was formalised in February 2015.

List of comarques
Comarca revisions
Revisions to the comarques took place in 1988 (creation of Pla d'Estany, Pla d'Urgell, and Alta Ribagorça), 1990 (various adjustments), and May 2015 (creation of Moianès). The Catalan government's "Report on the revision of [Catalonia](2549)'s territorial organisation model" (the Roca Report), published in 2000, recommends many more changes to comarques, which have not yet been adopted except for the 2015 creation of Moianès. The other proposed new comarques are: Vall de Camprodon (capital at Camprodon), Selva Marítima (capital at Blanes), Alta Segarra (capital at Calaf), Segre Mitjà (capital at Ponts), and Baix Llobregat Nord (capital at Martorell).
In a non-binding referendum in July 2015, a majority of municipalities of the Lluçanès region of Osona voted to join a proposed new comarca of that name. It was finally added to the list of Comarques on the 3rd of May 2023.

Northern Catalan comarques
There are six comarques which are often referred to as the historical comarques of [Catalonia](2549), because their present-day territory was a part of the former Principality of [Catalonia](2549), but nowadays they lie in Northern [Catalonia](2549), administered by France.

See also
Comarcas of Spain
Local government in Spain
Municipalities of [Catalonia](2549)
Provinces of Spain
Vegueries of [Catalonia](2549)

Footnotes
References
External links
(in Catalan) The Statistical Institute of [Catalonia](2549) contains statistical information for [Catalonia](2549), with in-depth details for each individual comarca and other types of divisions. Link to the English version.
(in Catalan) History of the current county division. [Catalonia](2549) Archived 2007-01-27 at the Wayback Machine, La Franja Archived 2007-01-27 at the Wayback Machine and Northern [Catalonia](2549) Archived 2007-01-27 at the Wayback Machine.