2604
Aligot
Aligot (Occitan: Aligòt) is a dish made from cheese blended into mashed potatoes (often with some garlic) that is made in L'Aubrac (Aveyron, Cantal, Lozère) region in the southern Massif Central of France.  This fondue-like dish from the Aveyron department is a common sight in Auvergne restaurants.

Background
Traditionally made with the Tomme de Laguiole (Tomme fraîche), or Tomme d'Auvergne cheese, aligot is an Occitan speciality highly appreciated in the local gastronomy with Toulouse sausages or roast pork. Other cheeses are also used in place of Tomme, including Cantal, mozzarella and Laguiole. The choice of cheese is important, and strongly affects the result. Tomme is not easily available outside France; many other cheeses are reported to be too strong. The cheese must be mild, with a lactic tang, but not too much salt, and melt easily. A comparison of the cheeses available in the UK found creamy (rather than the crumbly variety) Lancashire to be best, rejecting most other suggestions; other cheeses will be needed where neither Tomme nor Lancashire are available. Floury, rather than waxy, potatoes are preferable.

Ingredients
Aligot is made from mashed potatoes blended with butter, cream, crushed garlic, and melted cheese. The dish is ready when it develops a smooth, elastic texture. While recipes vary, the Larousse Gastronomique gives the ingredients as 1 kg potatoes; 500 g tomme fraîche, Laguiole, or Cantal cheese; 2 garlic cloves; 30 g butter; salt and pepper.

Serving history
This dish was prepared for pilgrims on the way to Santiago de Compostela who stopped for a night in that region. According to legend, aligot was originally prepared with bread, and potatoes were substituted after their introduction to France. Today, it is enjoyed for village gatherings and celebrations as a main dish. Aligot is still cooked by hand in Aveyron homes and street markets. Aligot is traditionally served with Auvergne red wine.

Etymology
The name aligot may have been derived from the Occitan alicouot, from the Latin aliquid, or from the Old French harigoter.

See also
Truffade
List of cheese dishes
List of potato dishes
 Food portal

References
External links
Aligot recipe in the word on cheese culture magazine
Aligot recipe in Country Life magazine
Aligot recipe in The Modern [Cheese](2552)maker
Aligot recipe in The Science of Good Cooking
Advertisement for aligot recipe on CKBK recipe site (subscription required)
Advertisement for another aligot recipe on CKBK recipe site (subscription required)
Advertisement for Gubbeen, a book about an Irish farm ISBN 0857838512
Advertisement for Rick Stein's Secret France ISBN 1473531713
Advertisement for Sunday Brunch, a talk show on Channel4 (registration required)