283
Bernese Mountain Dog
The Bernese Mountain Dog (German: Berner Sennenhund) is a large dog breed from Bern, Switzerland and the Swiss Alps, being one of the four breeds of Sennenhund-type dogs, with roots in the Roman mastiffs. The name Berner (or Bernese in English) refers to the breed's area of origin in the canton of Bern, and Sennenhund is derived from the German Senne ("alpine pasture") and Hund ("hound/dog"), as they accompanied the alpine herders and dairymen called Senn. This breed was originally kept as a general farm dog and large Sennenhunde in the past were also used as draft animals pulling carts. The breed was officially established in 1912.

History
Historically, in some locales at least, the breed was called a Dürrbachhund or Dürrbächler, for a small town (Dürrbach) where the large dogs were especially frequent.
The dogs have roots in the Roman mastiffs.
The breed was used as an all-purpose farm dog for guarding property and to drive dairy cattle long distances from the farm to the alpine pastures. The farmers used the dogs to transport their carts of milk and cheese and were known by the locals as "Cheese Dogs." In the early 1900s, fanciers exhibited the few examples of the large dogs at shows in Bern, and in 1907 a few breeders from the Burgdorf region founded the first breed club, the Schweizerische Dürrbach-Klub, and wrote the first Standard which defined the dogs as a separate breed. By 1910, there were already 107 registered members of the breed. There is a photo of a working Bernese Mountain Dog, dated 1905 at the Fumee Fall rest area in Quinnesec, Michigan.
In 1937, the American Kennel Club recognized the breed. Today, the club classifies it as a member of the Working Group. In the US the Bernese Mountain Dog is growing in popularity, ranking in 22nd place by the American Kennel Club in 2017.
These dogs are very popular as family dogs in German-speaking countries. The German Association of Dog Breeders listed the Bernese at the 11th rank per live births in 2014.

Appearance
Colouring
Like the other Sennenhund, the Bernese mountain dog is a large, heavy dog with a distinctive tri-coloured coat, black with white chest and rust-coloured markings above eyes, sides of the mouth, front of legs, and out around the white chest. However, it is the only breed of Sennenhund dogs with a long coat. The ideal of a perfectly marked individual gives the impression of a white horseshoe shape around the nose, which is always black. There is a white "Swiss cross" on the chest when viewed from the front. A "Swiss kiss" is a white mark located typically behind the neck, but may be a part of the neck. A full ring would not meet the type standard. The AKC breed standard lists, as disqualifications, blue eye colour and any ground colour other than black.

Height and weight ranges
Males are 25–27.5 in (64–70 cm), while females are 23–26 in (58–66 cm). Weight is 80–120 lb (35–55 kg) for males, while it is 75–100 lb (35–45 kg) for females.

Physical traits
Considered a dry-mouthed breed, the Bernese mountain dog is slightly longer than it is tall, highly muscular, with a strong, wide back.  The head of a Bernese mountain dog is flat on the top with a moderate stop, and the ears are medium-sized, triangular, set high, and rounded at the top. The teeth have a scissors bite. The legs of the Bernese are straight and strong, with round, arched toes. The dewclaws of the Bernese are often removed. Its bushy tail is carried low.

Temperament
The breed standard for the Bernese mountain dog states that dogs should not be "aggressive, anxious or distinctly shy", but rather should be "good-natured", "self-assured", and "docile". They may be aloof with strangers, and often attach themselves to one favorite person.  The temperament of individual dogs may vary, as with all breeds.
Bernese can be calm inside the house and need activity and exercise, but do not have a great deal of endurance. They can move with amazing bursts of speed for their size when motivated. If they are sound (no problems with their hips, elbows, or other joints), they enjoy hiking and generally stick close to their people.
Bernese mountain dogs are a breed that generally does well with children, as they are very affectionate. They are patient dogs that take well to children climbing over them.  Though they have great energy, a Bernese will also be happy with a calm evening.
Bernese work well with other pets and around strangers.  They are excellent guardians.  They tend to bond with one owner or family, and are somewhat aloof and standoffish towards strangers.

Health
Medical problems
Bernese Mountain Dogs have a high frequency of neoplasia. One study found 55% of deaths to be attributable to cancer. The breed has a high prevalence of elbow dysplasia, with studies ranging from a prevalence of 13.91% to 26%. An allele of the SOD1 gene: SOD1:c.52T has only been found in the Bernese Mountain Dog with 3.5% of Bernese Mountain Dogs having this allele. This mutation is associated with canine degenerative myelopathy. Another mutation associated with the condition — although not exclusive to the breed — has a prevalence of 38% in the Bernese Mountain Dog. The Bernese Mountain Dog has an increased prevalence of immune-mediated glomerulonephritis. A Swiss study found both the incidence and mortality of renal disease to be higher in this breed than any other — the incidence was 3.2 times higher than the average and the mortality was 8.2 times the average. The breed has a high risk of developing high-grade mastocytoma, with an Austrian study finding Bernese Mountain Dogs being three times as likely to have the condition than the general population.
Histiocytosis is a rare group of disorders that involve a build up of histiocytes in tissue and organs, causing damage to the tissue or organ. It may be benign or malignant. Malignant histiocytosis is a rapidly progressive multisystem cancerous disease that affects the Bernese Mountain Dog. It's a familial disease with a heritability value of 0.298 and accounts for a quarter of all tumours in the breed. Other histiocytosis conditions such as systemic histiocytosis and cutaneous histiocytosis are also more prevalent in the breed. Mutations have been identified that are believed to play a role in this are mutations to genes that help suppress tumours, including: CDKN2A/B, PTEN, and RB1. Another related mutation is to the PTPN11 gene, which is known to be related to histiocytosis and cancer in humans.
The Bernese Mountain Dog is one of the more commonly affected breeds for type I von Willebrand's disease.

Life expectancy
Despite the fact that larger breeds have a lower life expectancy than smaller breeds the life expectancy of the Bernese Mountain Dog is still low even when compared to breeds of similar size. 

In a 2016 Swiss study the life expectancy was found to be 8.4 years, based on the deaths of 381 out of 389 dogs in the study.
A 2013 Dutch study found a life expectancy of 8 years.
A 2024 UK study found a life expectancy of 10.1 years compared to 12 years for crossbreeds and 12.7 years for purebreds.
A 2013 French study found a life expectancy of 8.1 years.
A Swedish study from 2005 found 72% of Bernese Mountain Dogs to have died before reaching 10 years of age.

Care
Activities
The Bernese's calm temperament makes them a natural for pulling small carts or wagons, a task they originally performed in Switzerland. With proper training they enjoy giving children rides in a cart or participating in a parade, such as the Conway, New Hampshire holiday parade. Regional Bernese clubs often offer carting workshops. Carting competitions are held for the breed.
On July 1, 2010, the Bernese Mountain Dog became eligible to compete in AKC Herding Events. Herding instincts and trainability can be measured at noncompetitive herding tests. Berners exhibiting basic herding instincts can be trained to compete in herding trials.
The breed is "energetic, attentive, impetuous," but indisposed to biting. They tend to attach to one person, and have an inherent suspicion of strangers.  And Switzerland they excel at herd guardianship, especially in the Holy Regions. They are untiring, often unruly, resistant to the coldest winters, and excellent defenders of stable or home. They have been used by the police in Switzerland.

Grooming
Bernese Mountain Dogs shed year-round, and the heaviest shedding is during seasonal changes. Usually the Bernese will only require a brushing once a week, with more in spring and fall, to keep its coat neat and reduce the amount of fur on the floor and furniture. The Bernese will only require a bath about once every couple of months or so, depending on how high its activity level is and how often it spends its time in the dirt.
Special attention should be paid to the ears of the Bernese Mountain Dog, as they can trap bacteria, dirt, and liquid. The risk of an ear infection drops with weekly ear cleanings using a veterinarian-recommended cleanser.

Notable Bernese Mountain Dogs
Hercules is Pittsburgh Steelers quarterback Ben Roethlisberger's dog that he brought home from the Emmental region of Switzerland during a 2006 weeklong trip to discover his family's roots in the country.
Smelly and Harvey Milkbone are two Bernese Mountain Dogs owned by the characters Bryan (Andrew Rannells) and David (Justin Bartha) in the 2012 TV series The New Normal.
Buttercup is a Bernese Mountain Dog on the television series 9-1-1: Lone Star.
Ohly was a Bernese Mountain Dog in Canada who became known after disappearing and then being found on Mount Seymour in a dangerous area known as "Suicide Gulley." Members of North Shore Rescue, a local mountain rescue team, tracked, located and rescued Ohly.
Quincey von Wiesmadern, has appeared in various videos with Hansi Hinterseer, an Austrian singer, entertainer and former member of the Austrian Ski Team.
Hannah is the real-life inspiration for the protagonist of children's books such as A Beach Day for Hannah and A Snow Day for Hannah by Linda Petrie Bunch.
Argus and Fiona were two Bernese mountain dogs that were shot and killed when they entered a neighbor's yard. The neighbor who shot the dogs admits that he was overreacting.  A Pennsylvania state law states that humans are free to kill animals attacking domestic animals. The man feared a possible attack on his sheep, who were in their fenced off grazing area. Attacks on a neighbor's farm had taken place and resulted in the death of several animals sometime the previous year, although the type of dog who attacked those animals was not a Bernese. However, since no attack was in progress at the time of the shooting, the shooter was charged with two counts of cruelty to animals and one count of recklessly endangering another person, the latter a result of there being a house within the possible line of fire. There were no residents at home at the time of the shooting.  The prosecuting attorney dithered about bringing charges. On September 11, 2013, the shooter was convicted on two counts of animal cruelty. He faces up to five years in jail for each count.
Izzy survived the destruction of her family's Northern California home in the October 2017 Northern California wildfires and emerged from the woods with her tail wagging as her family investigated the ruins. Family members captured the reunion on video.
Bród and Síoda, two pet dogs of the President of Ireland Michael D. Higgins. Síoda died on September 19, 2020. In March 2021, a new puppy named Misneach was first photographed with President Higgins. Bród died on April 22, 2023.
Stella is a Bernese mountain dog in Plymouth, Michigan who has two restaurants named after her, "Stella's Black Dog Tavern," and "Stella's Trackside." She also has a book written about her titled Introducing Stella.

Rescues
Nico (2015), an adopted Bernese mountain dog, became a hero when he saved two people who were being swept out into the ocean by a California rip current.
Bella saved owner Chris Larocque from a burning house by pulling him out. The owner had reduced mobility from the injuries inflicted, and said that he would have died without Bella's help.
Oakley (2014) saved her family, by sitting on her owner's head until he woke up, when their Vermont ski condo caught fire overnight.
Ben, a Bernese Mountain Dog/Border Collie mix, saved his family from a fire that started after they were asleep. He alerted the babysitter who was able to get the two kids and Ben out to safety.

Notes
Explanatory footnotes
Citations


== Further reading ==