2940
Banana cake
A banana cake is a cake prepared using banana as a primary ingredient and typical cake ingredients. It can be prepared in various manners, including as a layer cake, as muffins and as cupcakes. Steamed banana cake is found in Chinese, Malaysian, Indonesian and Vietnamese cuisine. In the Philippines, the term "banana cake" refers to banana bread introduced during the American colonial period of the Philippines.

Preparation
[Banana](2900) cake is prepared using banana as a primary ingredient and typical cake ingredients such as flour, sugar, eggs, butter, margarine or oil and baking soda. The bananas can be mashed or puréed using a food processor or electric mixer and mixed into the cake batter, and the cake can also be topped or garnished with sliced bananas. [Banana](2900) cake may be prepared as a use for browned or overly-ripe bananas. Chocolate may be used as an ingredient, which along with the banana is an enjoyable flavor combination for some people. Nuts such as walnuts and macadamias may be used in the batter and to top and garnish the cake.
An icing or glaze may be used in the cake's preparation, which can include alcoholic beverages such as bourbon in it. [Banana](2900) cake can be baked, and also prepared as a steamed cake, for which a food steamer may be used. [Banana](2900) cake may have a moist texture. It can be prepared as a layer cake, and the cake batter can be used to prepare banana muffins and cupcakes. It can be prepared as a vegetarian dish and as a low-fat dish.

	[Banana](2900) cakes

Types
In Chinese cuisine
In Chinese cuisine, banana cake is a type of gao, which refers to steamed, flour-based cakes. Chinese gao is typically served along with meals or between meals with tea, and is typically not served as a dessert.
In Burmese (Myanmar) cuisine
In Burmese cuisine, banana cake is a popular dessert. It is frequently served at weddings, birthday parties, and feasts. It is also eaten during the Ramadan festival of Eid.

[Bánh chuối](2982)
[Bánh chuối](2982) is a Vietnamese banana cake or bread pudding. The cake is typically steamed, and the bread pudding may be baked.

Kue nagasari
Kue nagasari is a popular Indonesian steamed banana cake that can be prepared using banana, mung bean flour or rice flour, coconut milk and sugar.

See also
List of cakes
List of banana dishes

References
Further reading
Shi, J.; Shahidi, F.; Ho, C.T. (2005). Asian Functional Foods. Nutraceutical Science and Technology. CRC Press. pp. 116–117. ISBN 978-1-4200-2811-9.

External links
 Media related to [Banana](2900) cakes at Wikimedia Commons