3001
20th century in literature
Literature of the 20th century refers to world literature produced during the 20th century (1901 to 2000).
The main periods in question are often grouped by scholars as Modernist literature, Postmodern literature, flowering from roughly 1900 to 1940 and 1960 to 1990 respectively, roughly using World War II as a transition point. After 1960, the somewhat malleable term "contemporary literature" widely appears.
Although these terms (modern, contemporary and postmodern) are generally applicable to and stem from Western literary history, scholars often use them in reference to Asian, Latin American and [African literature](1778)s. Non-western writers, in particular in Postcolonial literature, have been at the forefront of literary evolution during the twentieth century.
Technological advances facilitated lower production cost for books, coupled with rising populations and literacy rates, which resulted in a significant rise in production of popular literature and trivial literature, comparable to the similar developments in music. The division of "popular literature" and "high literature" in the 20th century is overlapped by genres such as detectives or science fiction, despite being largely ignored by mainstream literary criticism for most of the century. These genres developed their own establishments and critical awards; these include the Nebula Award (since 1965), the British Fantasy Award (since 1971) or the Mythopoeic Awards (since 1971).
Towards the end of the 20th century, electronic literature grew in importance in light of the development of hypertext and later the World Wide Web.
The Nobel Prize in Literature was awarded annually throughout the century (with the exception of 1914, 1918, 1935 and 1940–1943), the first laureate (1901) being Sully Prudhomme. The New York Times Best Seller list has been published since 1942.
The best-selling literary works of the 20th century are estimated to be The Lord of the Rings (1954/55, 150 million copies), Le Petit Prince (The Little Prince, 1943, 140 million copies), Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone (1997, 120 million copies) and And Then There Were None (1939, 115 million copies). 
The Lord of the Rings was also voted "book of the century" in various surveys.
Perry Rhodan (1961 to present) proclaimed as the best-selling book series, with an estimated total of 1 billion copies sold.

1901–1918
The Fin de siècle movement of the Belle Époque persisted into the 20th century, but was brutally cut short with the outbreak of World War I (an effect depicted e.g. in Thomas Mann's The Magic Mountain, published 1924). The Dada movement of 1916–1920 was at least in part a protest against the bourgeois nationalist and colonialist interests which many Dadaists believed were the root cause of the war; the movement heralded the Surrealism movement of the 1920s.
1900

Lord Jim by Joseph Conrad (Poland, England)
The Knights of the Cross by Henryk Sienkiewicz (Poland)
Genre fiction

The Wonderful Wizard of Oz by L. Frank Baum (US)
1901

Buddenbrooks by Thomas Mann (Germany)
The Inheritors by Joseph Conrad and Ford Madox Ford (England)
Kim by Rudyard Kipling (India, England)
Genre fiction

The Purple Cloud by M. P. Shiel (Montserrat, England)
The First Men in the Moon by H. G. Wells (England)
1902

Heart of Darkness by Joseph Conrad
The Immoralist by [André Gide](3067) (France)
The Wings of the Dove by Henry James (US, England)
The Grand Babylon Hotel by Arnold Bennett (England)
Genre fiction

The Hound of the Baskervilles by Arthur Conan Doyle (Scotland)
Just So Stories by Rudyard Kipling
Plays

Man and Superman by George Bernard Shaw (Ireland)
The Lower Depths by Maxim Gorky
1903

Romance by Joseph Conrad and Ford Madox Ford
The Ambassadors by Henry James
The Pit by Frank Norris (US)
In Wonderland by Knut Hamsun (Norway)
Genre fiction

The Call of the Wild by Jack London (US)
The Riddle of the Sands by Erskine Childers (England, Ireland)
1904

The Golden Bowl by Henry James
Nostromo by Joseph Conrad
The Napoleon of Notting Hill by G. K. Chesterton (England)
The Peasants by Władysław Reymont (Poland)
Genre fiction

The Food of the Gods by H. G. Wells
The Sea-Wolf by Jack London
Green Mansions by William Henry Hudson ([Argentina](1862), England)
Plays

John Bull's Other Island by George Bernard Shaw
The Cherry Orchard by [Anton Chekhov](3081)
1905

Hadrian the Seventh by Frederick Rolfe aka Baron Corvo (England, Italy)
Where Angels Fear to Tread by E. M. Forster (England)
Kipps by H. G. Wells
Songs of Life and Hope by Rubén Darío (Nicaragua)
The House of Mirth by Edith Wharton (US)
The Club of Queer Trades by G. K. Chesterton
1906

The Jungle by Upton Sinclair (US)
The Confusions of Young Törless by Robert Musil ([Austria](1585))
Mother by Maxim Gorky
Genre fiction

Puck of Pook's Hill by Rudyard Kipling
Peter Pan in Kensington Gardens by J. M. Barrie (Scotland)
Time and the Gods by Lord Dunsany (Ireland, England)
White Fang by Jack London
Plays

The Aran Islands by John Millington Synge (Ireland)
The Morality of Mrs. Dulska by Gabriela Zapolska (Poland)
1907

Bardidi by Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay (India)
The Secret Agent by Joseph Conrad
The Longest Journey by E. M. Forster
Genre fiction

The Listener and Other Stories by Algernon Blackwood (England) – contains The Willows, one of the first 'cosmic horror' stories
The Hill of Dreams by Arthur Machen (England)
Plays

The Playboy of the Western World by John Millington Synge
Poetry

Cautionary Tales for Children by Hilaire Belloc (France, England)
1908

The Man Who Was Thursday by G. K. Chesterton
A Room with a View by E. M. Forster
The Iron Heel by Jack London
Hell by Henri Barbusse (France, Russia)
The Magician by Somerset Maugham (England, France) – based on the author's meeting with Aleister Crowley
Genre fiction

The Wind in the Willows by Kenneth Grahame (England)
Poetry

Personae by Ezra Pound (US, England, Italy) – one of the first examples of 'modernist' poetry
1909

Martin Eden by Jack London
Sparrows: the story of an unprotected girl by Horace W C Newte
Tono-Bungay by H. G. Wells
Three Lives by Gertrude Stein (US, France)
Poetry

Exultations by Ezra Pound
Poems by William Carlos Williams (US)
Plays

The Blue Bird by Maurice Maeterlinck (Belgium)
1910

Howards End by E. M. Forster
The Card by Arnold Bennett
The History of Mr Polly by H. G. Wells
1911

Zuleika Dobson by Max Beerbohm (England)
In a German Pension by Katherine Mansfield (England) – short stories
Under Western Eyes by Joseph Conrad
The White Peacock by D. H. Lawrence (England)
Jennie Gerhardt by Theodore Dreiser (US)
In Desert and Wilderness by Henryk Sienkiewicz (Poland)
Genre fiction

Peter and Wendy by J. M. Barrie (Scotland)
1912

The Trespasser by D. H. Lawrence
Death in Venice by Thomas Mann (Germany)
Genre fiction

Riders of the Purple Sage by Zane Grey (US)
The Lost World by Arthur Conan Doyle
Tarzan of the Apes by Edgar Rice Burroughs (US)
Plays

Pygmalion by George Bernard Shaw
1913

Petersburg by [Andrei Bely](3063) (Russia)
Swann's Way by Marcel Proust (France)
Le Grand Meaulnes by Alain-Fournier (France)
Sons and Lovers by D. H. Lawrence
Chance by Joseph Conrad
Genre fiction

A Prisoner in Fairyland by Algernon Blackwood – adapted into a play, it later became the Andrew Lloyd Webber musical Starlight Express
The Mystery of Dr. Fu-Manchu by 'Sax Rohmer' (England)
Poetry

Alcools by Guillaume Apollinaire (Poland, France) – dada poems
Gitanjali by Rabindranath Tagore
1914

Dubliners by James Joyce (Ireland, France, Italy) – short stories
The Prussian Officer and Other Stories by D. H. Lawrence – short stories
Der Untertan by Heinrich Mann
The Vatican Cellars by [André Gide](3067)
Tender Buttons by Gertrude Stein
The Golem by Gustav Meyrink ([Austria](1585))
Mist by Miguel de Unamuno (Spain)
Maurice by E. M. Forster – unpublished
Sinister Street by Compton Mackenzie (Scotland, Greece)
The Flying Inn by G. K. Chesterton
The Ragged-Trousered Philanthropists by Robert Noonan (UK)
Poetry

North of Boston by Robert Frost (US)
1915

The Good Soldier by Ford Madox Ford
The Rainbow by D. H. Lawrence
The Metamorphosis by [Franz Kafka](3000)
Of Human Bondage by Somerset Maugham
The Underdogs by Mariano Azuela (Mexico)
Victory by Joseph Conrad
Pointed Roofs by Dorothy Richardson
The Voyage Out by Virginia Woolf (England)
Vainglory by Ronald Firbank (England)
Rashōmon by Ryūnosuke Akutagawa
Genre fiction

The Thirty-Nine Steps by John Buchan (Scotland, Canada)
1916

A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man by James Joyce
Women in Love by D. H. Lawrence – initially banned, published in 1920
Genre fiction

Greenmantle by John Buchan
Poetry

Salt-Water Poems and Ballads by John Masefield (England)
Mountain Interval by Robert Frost
1917

Under Fire by Henri Barbusse (France, Russia)
Walpurgis Night by Gustav Meyrink
Growth of the Soil by Knut Hamsun
The Shadow Line by Joseph Conrad
Caprice by Ronald Firbank
Devdas by Sarat Chandra Chattopadhyay
Poetry

Dulce et Decorum est and Anthem for Doomed Youth by Wilfred Owen (England) – published posthumously
Prufrock and Other Observations by T. S. Eliot (US, England)
Non-fiction

The State and Revolution by Vladimir Lenin
1918

Tarr by Wyndham Lewis (Canada, England)
Man of Straw by Heinrich Mann (Germany)
Poetry

Calligrammes by Guillaume Apollinaire – dada poetry
Non-fiction

Eminent Victorians by Lytton Strachey (England)
Reflections of a Nonpolitical Man by Thomas Mann (Germany)

Interwar period
The 1920s were a period of literary creativity, and works of several notable authors appeared during the period. D. H. Lawrence's novel Lady Chatterley's Lover was a scandal at the time because of its explicit descriptions of sex. James Joyce's novel, Ulysses, published in 1922 in Paris, was one of the most important achievements of literary modernism.
1919

Within a Budding Grove by Marcel Proust
Night and Day by Virginia Woolf
Winesburg, Ohio by Sherwood Anderson (US) – the first 'lost generation' novel
Valmouth by Ronald Firbank
Bazaar-e-Husn by Premchand (publ. in Hindi as Seva-sadan)
Genre fiction

Dope by Sax Rohmer – inspired by the true story of Limehouse dope-dealer Brilliant Chang
Dope Darling by Leda Burke (David Garnett) (England)
1920

We by Yevgeny Zamyatin (Russia)
Limbo by Aldous Huxley (England) – short stories
The Lost Girl by D. H. Lawrence
This Side of Paradise by F. Scott Fitzgerald (US)
The London Venture by Michael Arlen ([Armenia](1567), England)
Storm of Steel by Ernst Jünger (Germany)
A Voyage to Arcturus by David Lindsay (Scotland)
Main Street by Sinclair Lewis (US)
The Age of Innocence by Edith Wharton (US)
Plays

Six Characters in Search of an Author by Luigi Pirandello (Italy)
Beyond the Horizon and Anna Christie by Eugene O'Neill – Pulitzer prize winner
1921

The Guermantes Way by Marcel Proust
Crome Yellow by Aldous Huxley
England, My England and Other Stories by D. H. Lawrence – short stories
The Forsyte Saga by John Galsworthy (England) – pentalogy, first volume published in 1906
My Life and Loves by Frank Harris (England, US) – four volumes of quasi-factual sex gossip, the fifth completed by Alex Trocchi
Plays

Back to Methuselah by George Bernard Shaw
R.U.R. (Rossum's Universal Robots) by Karel Čapek – from which the term 'robot' was coined
1922

Ulysses by James Joyce
Jacob's Room by Virginia Woolf
Sodom and Gomorrah by Marcel Proust
Croatian God Mars by Miroslav Krleža
The Enormous Room by E. E. Cummings (US)
Futility by William Gerhardie (Russia, England)
The Beautiful and Damned by F. Scott Fitzgerald
Mortal Coils by Aldous Huxley – short stories
Aaron's Rod by D. H. Lawrence Kim
The Garden Party by Katherine Mansfield – short stories
Siddhartha by Hermann Hesse (Germany, Switzerland)
Peter Whiffle by Carl Van Vechten (US)
Babbitt by Sinclair Lewis
Lady into Fox by David Garnett
The True Story of Ah Q by Lu Xun (China)
Poetry

The Waste Land by T. S. Eliot
1923

Confessions of Zeno by Italo Svevo (Italy)
The Good Soldier Švejk by Jaroslav Hašek (Czechoslovakia)
The Captive by Marcel Proust
Kangaroo by D. H. Lawrence
Antic Hay by Aldous Huxley
Three Soldiers by John Dos Passos (US)
The Great American Novel by William Carlos Williams
The Devil in the Flesh by Raymond Radiguet (France)
Aelita by Alexey Tolstoy (Russia)
Plays

The Shadow of a Gunman by Seán O'Casey (Ireland)
Poetry

New Hampshire by Robert Frost
The Duino Elegies by Rainer Maria Rilke
1924

The Magic Mountain by Thomas Mann (Germany)
In Our Time by Ernest Hemingway (US) – short stories
A Passage to India by E. M. Forster
The Vortex by José Eustasio Rivera (Colombia)
Little Mexican and Other Stories by Aldous Huxley – short stories
Bohemian Lights by Ramón del Valle-Inclán (Spain)
The Fox and The Captain's Doll by D. H. Lawrence – short stories
Miranda by Antoni Lange (Poland)
Riddles and Conundrums for All Occasions
Genre fiction

The Murder of Roger Ackroyd by Agatha Christie (England)
Plays

Juno and the Paycock by Seán O'Casey
The Vortex by Noël Coward (England)
1925

Mrs Dalloway by Virginia Woolf
The Trial by [Franz Kafka](3000) (Czechoslovakia) – posthumous, first English translation in 1930
The Great Gatsby by F. Scott Fitzgerald – often described as the epitome of the "Jazz Age" in American literature
The Green Hat by Michael Arlen – perhaps the epitome of the jazz age in British literature
Paris Peasant by Louis Aragon (France)
Albertine disparue by Marcel Proust
Manhattan Transfer by John Dos Passos
In the American Grain by William Carlos Williams
The Desert of Love by François Mauriac (France)
Gentlemen Prefer Blondes by Anita Loos (US)
Those Barren Leaves by Aldous Huxley
St Mawr by D. H. Lawrence – short stories
The Making of Americans by Gertrude Stein
Heart of a Dog by Mikhail Bulgakov (Russia / Soviet Union)
The Artamonov Business by Maxim Gorky (Russia / Soviet Union)
Genre fiction

Beau Geste by P. C. Wren (England)
Poetry

The Hollow Men by T. S. Eliot
Non-fiction

The Old Straight Track by Alfred Watkins (England) – introducing ley lines
1926

The Castle by [Franz Kafka](3000) – posthumous, first English translation in 1932
The Counterfeiters by [André Gide](3067)
The Sun Also Rises aka Fiesta by Ernest Hemingway
Moravagine by Blaise Cendrars (France)
Don Segundo Sombra by Ricardo Güiraldes ([Argentina](1862))
Nigger Heaven by Carl Van Vechten
Two or Three Graces and Other Stories by Aldous Huxley – short stories
The Plumed Serpent by D. H. Lawrence
The Call of Cthulhu by H. P. Lovecraft
Genre fiction

Winnie-the-Pooh by A. A. Milne (England)
Poetry

A Drunk Man Looks at the Thistle by 'Hugh MacDiarmid' (Scotland)
Plays

The Plough and the Stars by Seán O'Casey
Raktakarabi by Rabindranath Tagore
Non-fiction

Seven Pillars of Wisdom by T. E. Lawrence (England, Arabia)
1927

To the Lighthouse by Virginia Woolf
Time Regained by Marcel Proust
Steppenwolf by Hermann Hesse
Men Without Women by Ernest Hemingway – short stories
Vestal Fire by Compton Mackenzie
Dusty Answer by Rosamond Lehmann (England)
Elmer Gantry by Sinclair Lewis
The Rocking-Horse Winner by D. H. Lawrence – short stories
Poetry

Jhôra Palok by Jibanananda Das (India)
Plays

The Silver Tassie by Seán O'Casey (Ireland)
1928

Berlin Alexanderplatz by [Alfred Döblin](3052) (Germany)
Nadja by [André Breton](3066) (France)
Story of the Eye by Georges Bataille (France)
Parade's End by Ford Madox Ford – war tetralogy, first volume in 1926
Gypsy Ballads by Federico García Lorca
Point Counter Point by Aldous Huxley
Lady Chatterley's Lover by D. H. Lawrence – banned until 1963
Decline and Fall by Evelyn Waugh (England)
Amerika by [Franz Kafka](3000) – posthumous, first English translation in 1938
All Quiet on the Western Front by Erich Maria Remarque (Germany) – recounts the horrors of World War I and also the deep detachment from German civilian life felt by many men returning from the front
Chevengur by [Andrei Platonov](3064) (Soviet Russia, excerpts)
The City by Valerian Pidmohylny (Soviet Ukraine)
Plays

Strange Interlude by Eugene O'Neill (US) – Pulitzer prize winner
Messrs. Glembay by Miroslav Krleža
1929

Les Enfants Terribles by Jean Cocteau (France)
A Farewell to Arms by Ernest Hemingway (US)
Look Homeward, Angel by Thomas Wolfe
Death of a Hero by Richard Aldington (England)
The Sound and the Fury by William Faulkner (US)
Doña Bárbara by Rómulo Gallegos (Venezuela)
Mario and the Magician by Thomas Mann (Germany)
The Escaped Cock by D. H. Lawrence (England)
The Defence by Vladimir Nabokov (Russia, France)
Wolf Solent by John Cowper Powys (England)
The Good Companions by J. B. Priestley (England)
Non-fiction

Good-Bye to All That by Robert Graves (England)
A Room of One's Own by Virginia Woolf (England)
Genre fiction

Red Harvest by Dashiell Hammett (US) – the first hard-boiled American detective novel
Yogayog by Rabindranath Tagore (India) – original fiction in Bengali
1930

Vile Bodies by Evelyn Waugh
The Apes of God by Wyndham Lewis
Brief Candles by Aldous Huxley – short stories
As I Lay Dying by William Faulkner
Narcissus and Goldmund by Hermann Hesse
Angel Pavement by J. B. Priestley
The Virgin and the Gypsy and Love Among the Haystacks by D. H. Lawrence – short stories
Genre fiction

Last and First Men by Olaf Stapledon (England)
The Maltese Falcon by Dashiell Hammett (US)
Poetry

Whoroscope by Samuel Beckett (Ireland, France)
Plays

Private Lives by Noël Coward
Non-fiction

Memoirs of a Fox-Hunting Man by Siegfried Sassoon (England) – 2 volumes, 1st in 1929
1931

The Good Earth by Pearl S. Buck
The Waves by Virginia Woolf
Night Flight by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry (France)
Genre fiction

The Glass Key by Dashiell Hammett
At the Mountains of Madness by H. P. Lovecraft
Plays

Mourning Becomes Electra by Eugene O'Neill
Cavalcade by Noël Coward
Non-fiction

Axel's Castle by Edmund Wilson (US)
Music at Night by Aldous Huxley
1932

The Return of Philip Latinowicz by Miroslav Krleža
Journey to the End of Night by Louis-Ferdinand Céline (France)
Brave New World by Aldous Huxley (England)
The Memorial by Christopher Isherwood (England)
Laughter in the Dark by Vladimir Nabokov (Russia, France)
Light in August by William Faulkner
A Glastonbury Romance by John Cowper Powys
Stamboul Train by Graham Greene (England)
Black Mischief by Evelyn Waugh
Radetzky March by Joseph Roth ([Austria](1585))
Jew Boy by Simon Blumenfeld (England)
Poetry

The Orators by W. H. Auden (England)
1933

Man's Fate by André Malraux (France)
Love on the Dole by Walter Greenwood (England)
Miss Lonelyhearts by Nathanael West (US)
The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas by Gertrude Stein
Cat Country by Lao She (China)
Genre fiction

Lost Horizon by James Hilton (England)
Murder Must Advertise by Dorothy L. Sayers (England)
The Oppermanns by Lion Feuchtwanger
Non-fiction

Down and Out in Paris and London by George Orwell (England)
Texts and Pretexts by Aldous Huxley
In Praise of Shadows by Jun'ichirō Tanizaki
1934

Tropic of Cancer by Henry Miller (US) – a groundbreaking obscenity case before the U.S. Supreme Court in 1961 allowed its publication there
Call It Sleep by Henry Roth ([Austria](1585), US)
Tender Is the Night by F. Scott Fitzgerald
Threepenny Novel by Bertolt Brecht (Germany)
Despair by Vladimir Nabokov
It's a Battlefield by Graham Greene
A Handful of Dust by Evelyn Waugh
20,000 Streets Under the Sky by Patrick Hamilton (England)
Voyage in the Dark by Jean Rhys (Dominica, France, England)
Appointment in Samarra by John O'Hara (US)
A Scots Quair by Lewis Grassic Gibbon (Scotland) – trilogy, first volume published in 1932
Novel with Cocaine aka Cocain Romance by M. Ageyev (France)
Genre fiction

The Postman Always Rings Twice by James M. Cain (US)
Poetry

18 Poems by Dylan Thomas (Wales)
Non-fiction

Burmese Days by George Orwell
Death in the Afternoon by Ernest Hemingway
1935

Mr Norris Changes Trains by Christopher Isherwood
Eyeless in Gaza by Aldous Huxley
Auto-da-Fe by Elias Canetti (Bulgaria, Germany)
A Clergyman's Daughter by George Orwell
England Made Me by Graham Greene
A House in Paris by Elizabeth Bowen (Ireland)
Tortilla Flat by John Steinbeck (US)
Studs Lonigan by James T. Farrell (US) – trilogy, first volume published in 1932
Genre fiction

Little House on the Prairie by Laura Ingalls Wilder (US)
Poetry

Collected Poems by Cecil Day-Lewis (Northern Ireland)
Plays

Waiting for Lefty by Clifford Odets (US)
1936

Death on the Installment Plan by Louis-Ferdinand Céline
Black Spring by Henry Miller
U.S.A. by John Dos Passos
Mephisto by Klaus Mann (Germany, US)
Absalom, Absalom! by William Faulkner
Keep the Aspidistra Flying by George Orwell
Confession of a Murderer by Joseph Roth
Invitation to a Beheading by Vladimir Nabokov
The Wessex Novels by John Cowper Powys (England) – tetralogy, 1st vol published in 1927
Godaan by Premchand
Poetry

Ballads of Petrica Kerempuh by Miroslav Krleža
Dhushor Pandulipi by Jibanananda Das (India)
Genre fiction

Jamaica Inn by Daphne du Maurier (England)
Gone with the Wind by Margaret Mitchell (US)
A Gun for Sale by Graham Greene
1937

To Have and Have Not by Ernest Hemingway
The Years by Virginia Woolf
Of Mice and Men by John Steinbeck
Lions and Shadows by Christopher Isherwood
The Black Book by Lawrence Durrell (UK, Egypt)
Ferdydurke by Witold Gombrowicz (Poland)
Revenge for Love by Wyndham Lewis
White Mule by William Carlos Williams
Wide Boys Never Work by Robert Westerby (England, US)
Rickshaw Boy by Lao She (China)
The Life of Klim Samgin by Maxim Gorky – posthumous, tetralogy, first three volumes published in 1927–1931
Genre fiction

Star Maker by Olaf Stapledon
Night and the City by Gerald Kersh (England, US)
The Face on the Cutting-Room Floor by Cameron McCabe (Ernest Bornemann) (Germany, England)
The Hobbit by J. R. R. Tolkien (England)
Non-fiction

The Road to Wigan Pier by George Orwell
How Green Was My Valley by Richard Llewellyn (Wales)
1938

Nausea by Jean-Paul Sartre (France)
Murphy by Samuel Beckett
Tropic of Capricorn by Henry Miller
Man's Hope by André Malraux
The Death of the Heart by Elizabeth Bowen
Brighton Rock by Graham Greene
Scoop by Evelyn Waugh
The Gift by Vladimir Nabokov
Genre fiction

Brighton Rock by Graham Greene
Rebecca by Daphne du Maurier
Non-fiction

Journey to a War by W. H. Auden and Christopher Isherwood
Homage to Catalonia by George Orwell
Enemies of Promise by Cyril Connolly (England)
1939

The Grapes of Wrath by John Steinbeck
Finnegans Wake by James Joyce
The Banquet in Blitva by Miroslav Krleža
At Swim-Two-Birds by Flann O'Brien (Ireland)
Goodbye to Berlin by Christopher Isherwood
After Many a Summer by Aldous Huxley
Coming Up for Air by George Orwell
On the Marble Cliffs by Ernst Jünger
Good Morning, Midnight by Jean Rhys
The Day of the Locust by Nathanael West
The Legend of the Holy Drinker by Joseph Roth
Lotte in Weimar by Thomas Mann
The Confidential Agent by Graham Greene
Mister Johnson by Joyce Cary (Ireland)
Wind, Sand and Stars by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry
Pal Joey by John O'Hara
Genre fiction

The Big Sleep by Raymond Chandler (US)
Rogue Male by Geoffrey Household (England)
The Mask of Dimitrios by Eric Ambler
And Then There Were None by Agatha Christie
Poetry

Autumn Journal by Louis MacNeice (N Ireland)
The Map of Love by Dylan Thomas
Plays

This Happy Breed by Noël Coward

World War II
1940

Native Son by Richard Wright (US, France)
Darkness at Noon by [Arthur Koestler](3094) (Hungary, England)
The Master and Margarita by Mikhail Bulgakov – published in English 1966
For Whom the Bell Tolls by Ernest Hemingway
The Power and the Glory by Graham Greene
The Heart Is a Lonely Hunter by Carson McCullers (US)
Portrait of the Artist as a Young Dog by Dylan Thomas
Owen Glendower by John Cowper Powys
You Can't Go Home Again by Thomas Wolfe
And Quiet Flows the Don by Mikhail Sholokhov (Russia) – two volumes, first published in 1934
The feeling of the world by Carlos Drummond de Andrade (Brazil)
Genre fiction

Journey into Fear by Eric Ambler (England)
Farewell, My Lovely by Raymond Chandler
Plays

The Iceman Cometh by Eugene O'Neill
Non-fiction

To the Finland Station by Edmund Wilson
1941

Hangover Square by Patrick Hamilton
Reflections in a Golden Eye by Carson McCullers
The Third Policeman by Flann O'Brien
Genre fiction

Mildred Pierce by James M. Cain
Non-fiction

Grey Eminence by Aldous Huxley
1942

The Stranger by [Albert Camus](3042) ([Algeria](1317), France)
Our Lady of the Flowers by Jean Genet (France)
Flight to Arras by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry
Plays

The Flies by Jean-Paul Sartre
1943

Arrival and Departure by [Arthur Koestler](3094)
The Ministry of Fear by Graham Greene
The Man Without Qualities by Robert Musil ([Austria](1585)) – trilogy, first volume published 1930
Genre fiction

Double Indemnity by James M. Cain
The Little Prince by Antoine de Saint-Exupéry (France)
Poetry

Selected Poems by Keith Douglas (England)
Non-fiction

Being and Nothingness by Jean-Paul Sartre
The Myth of Sisyphus by [Albert Camus](3042)
1944

The Horse's Mouth by Joyce Cary
Ficciones by Jorge Luis Borges ([Argentina](1862)) – short stories
The Razor's Edge by Somerset Maugham
Time Must Have a Stop by Aldous Huxley
Plays

The Glass Menagerie by Tennessee Williams (US)
1945

Black Boy by Richard Wright (author)
Animal Farm by George Orwell
Watt by Samuel Beckett – published in 1953
Brideshead Revisited by Evelyn Waugh
Black Boy by Richard Wright
Lark Rise to Candleford by Flora Thompson (England) – trilogy, first volume in 1939
Genre fiction

If He Hollers Let Him Go by Chester Himes (US, France)
The Space Trilogy by C. S. Lewis (N Ireland) – first volume published in 1938
1946

Cry, the Beloved Country by Alan Paton (South Africa)
The Miracle of the Rose by Jean Genet
El Señor Presidente by Miguel Ángel Asturias (Guatemala)
Froth on the Daydream by Boris Vian (France)
The Member of the Wedding by Carson McCullers
Poetry

Deaths and Entrances by Dylan Thomas
Plays

The Winslow Boy by Terence Rattigan (England)
Non-fiction

Alamein to Zem Zem by Keith Douglas
Memoirs of Hecate County by Edmund Wilson
This Way for the Gas, Ladies and Gentlemen by Tadeusz Borowski (Poland)
1947

The Plague by [Albert Camus](3042)
Under the Volcano by Malcolm Lowry (England, Canada)
Bend Sinister by Vladimir Nabokov
The Victim by Saul Bellow (Canada, US)
The Conformist by Alberto Moravia (Italy)
The Middle of the Journey by Lionel Trilling (US)
Slaves of Solitude by Patrick Hamilton
Of Love and Hunger by Julian MacLaren-Ross (England)
Funeral Rites by Jean Genet
Snow Country by Yasunari Kawabata
Plays

A Streetcar Named Desire by Tennessee Williams
Non-fiction

The Diary of a Young Girl by Anne Frank (Netherlands)
1948

The Naked and the Dead by Norman Mailer (US)
Confessions of a Mask by 'Yukio Mishima' (Japan)
The Heart of the Matter by Graham Greene
El Túnel by Ernesto Sabato ([Argentina](1862))
The City and the Pillar by Gore Vidal (US)
Ape and Essence by Aldous Huxley
Ashes and Diamonds by Jerzy Andrzejewski (Poland)
Querelle of Brest by Jean Genet
Genre fiction

No Orchids for Miss Blandish by James Hadley Chase (England)
Plays

The Browning Version by Terence Rattigan
Non-fiction

The Second Sex by Simone de Beauvoir (France — early feminist study)
The Kon-Tiki Expedition by Thor Heyerdahl (Norway)
1949

Nineteen Eighty-Four by George Orwell
The Roads to Freedom by Jean-Paul Sartre – trilogy, first volume published 1945
The Thief's Journal by Jean Genet
The Man with the Golden Arm by Nelson Algren (US)
The Train Was on Time by Heinrich Böll (Germany)
The Aleph by Jorge Luis Borges
The Kingdom of this World by Alejo Carpentier (Mexico)
The Heat of the Day by Elizabeth Bowen
Genre fiction

The Trouble with Harry by Jack Trevor Story (England)
The Mating Season by P. G. Wodehouse
Plays

Death of a Salesman by Arthur Miller (US)

Postwar period
The intermediate postwar period separating "Modernism" from "Postmodernism" (1950s literature) is the floruit of the beat generation and the classical science fiction of Isaac Asimov, Arthur C. Clarke and Robert A. Heinlein. This period also saw the publication of Samuel Beckett's trilogy of novels, Molloy, Malone Dies, and The Unnameable, which enacted the dissolution of the self-identical human subject and inspired later novelists such as Thomas Bernhard, John Banville, and David Markson. The first works of electronic literature were written in the 1950s.
1950

Scenes from Provincial Life by William Cooper (England) – the first of the British 1950s 'kitchen sink' novels
Canto General by Pablo Neruda
Plays

The Bald Soprano by Eugène Ionesco (Romania, France)
Genre fiction

A Town Like Alice by Nevil Shute (England, Australia)
Strangers On a Train by Patricia Highsmith (US)
Non-fiction

The Authoritarian Personality by Theodor Adorno (Germany, US)
1951

Molloy by Samuel Beckett (Ireland, France)
Malone Dies by Samuel Beckett (Ireland, France)
The Catcher in the Rye by J. D. Salinger (US)
The Hive by Camilo José Cela (Spain)
Porius (A Romance of the Dark Ages) by John Cowper Powys (England)
The Grass Harp by Truman Capote (US)
Memoirs of Hadrian by Marguerite Yourcenar (France)
The Opposing Shore by Julien Gracq (France)
Plays

The Lesson by Eugène Ionesco (Romania, France)
Non-fiction

The Rebel by [Albert Camus](3042) (France)
1952

Invisible Man by Ralph Ellison (US)
Wise Blood by Flannery O'Connor (US)
Go by John Clellon Holmes (US) – the first Beat novel
The Natural by Bernard Malamud (US)
The Old Man and the Sea by Ernest Hemingway
East of Eden by John Steinbeck
Love Letter Generator by Christopher Strachey
Genre fiction

The Tiger in the Smoke by Margery Allingham (England)
The Killer Inside Me by Jim Thompson (US)
Plays

The Chairs by Eugène Ionesco (Romania, France)
1953

The Unnameable by Samuel Beckett (Ireland, France)
Junkie and Queer by William S. Burroughs (US)
Go Tell It On the Mountain by James Baldwin (US, France)
The Outsider by Richard Wright
The Adventures of Augie March by Saul Bellow
The Captive Mind by Czesław Miłosz (Poland)
Hurry on Down by John Wain (England) – the first 'angry young man' novel
Genre fiction

Casino Royale by Ian Fleming (England, Jamaica) –  first James Bond novel
The Long Goodbye by Raymond Chandler
Childhood's End by Arthur C. Clarke (England, Sri Lanka)
Foundation by Isaac Asimov (US) – trilogy, first volume published in 1951
Prelude to a Certain Midnight by Gerald Kersh
Plays

Waiting for Godot by Samuel Beckett
1954

Lord of the Flies by William Golding (England)
Lucky Jim by Kingsley Amis (England) – the most famous 'angry young man' novel
Under the Net by Iris Murdoch (England)
Bonjour Tristesse by Françoise Sagan (France)
Genre fiction

Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury (US)
Story of O by Pauline Réage (France)
Plays

Under Milk Wood by Dylan Thomas
The Quare Fellow by Brendan Behan (Ireland)
Non-fiction

The Doors of Perception by Aldous Huxley
1955

Lolita by Vladimir Nabokov
One by David Karp (US)
The Quiet American by Graham Greene
The Bread of Those Early Years by Heinrich Böll
The Tree of Man by Patrick White (Australia)
The Inheritors by William Golding
Pedro Páramo by Juan Rulfo (Mexico)
The Voyeur by Alain Robbe-Grillet (France)
The Genius and the Goddess by Aldous Huxley
The Deer Park by Norman Mailer
The Recognitions by William Gaddis (US)
Memed, My Hawk by Yaşar Kemal (Turkey)
Genre fiction

The Lord of the Rings by J. R. R. Tolkien, first volume in 1954
The Talented Mr. Ripley by Patricia Highsmith
Plays

Cat on a Hot Tin Roof by Tennessee Williams
Bus Stop by William Inge (US)
Poetry

The Less Deceived by Philip Larkin (England)
1956

The Fall by [Albert Camus](3042)
The Devil to Pay in the Backlands by João Guimarães Rosa
Giovanni's Room by James Baldwin
The Lonely Londoners by Samuel Selvon (Trinidad, England)
A Walk on the Wild Side by Nelson Algren
Genre fiction

The Chronicles of Narnia by C. S. Lewis (N Ireland) – seven volumes, first in 1950
Peyton Place by Grace Metalious
The Hundred and One Dalmatians by Dodie Smith (England)
Plays

Look Back In Anger by John Osborne (England) – the first 'angry young man' play
Poetry

Howl and Other Poems by Allen Ginsberg (US)
Non-fiction

Heaven and Hell by Aldous Huxley
1957

On the Road by Jack Kerouac (Canada, US)
Young Adam by Alexander Trocchi (Scotland)
Room at the Top by John Braine (England)
Doctor Zhivago by Boris Pasternak (Russia)
Voss by Patrick White
The Assistant by Bernard Malamud
Second Thoughts by Michel Butor (France)
Pnin by Vladimir Nabokov
Cairo Trilogy by Naguib Mahfouz (Egypt)
Gimpel the Fool by Isaac Bashevis Singer (Poland, US) – short stories, originally published in Yiddish years earlier
Atlas Shrugged by Ayn Rand (US)
Genre fiction

On the Beach by Nevil Shute
Plays

The Room and The Birthday Party by Harold Pinter (England)
Endgame by Samuel Beckett
The Entertainer by John Osborne
Orpheus Descending by Tennessee Williams
The Visit by Friedrich Dürrenmatt (Switzerland)
Poetry

Calling Out to Yeti by Wisława Szymborska (Poland)
1958

If This Is a Man by Primo Levi (Italy)
Breakfast At Tiffany's by Truman Capote
The Dharma Bums by Jack Kerouac
Saturday Night and Sunday Morning by Alan Sillitoe (England)
A Taste of Honey by Shelagh Delaney (England)
Things Fall Apart by Chinua Achebe (Nigeria)
The Bell by Iris Murdoch
Fowlers End by Gerald Kersh
Our Man in Havana by Graham Greene
Candy by Terry Southern (US)
Genre fiction

Exodus by Leon Uris (US)
Zimiamvian Trilogy by E. R. Eddison (England) – first volume in 1935
Molesworth by Geoffrey Willans (England) and Ronald Searle (England, France) – tetralogy, first book in 1954
Plays

Krapp's Last Tape by Samuel Beckett
Suddenly, Last Summer by Tennessee Williams
Non-fiction

The Theatre and Its Double by [Antonin Artaud](3084) (France)
Borstal Boy by Brendan Behan
1959

A Raisin in the Sun by Lorraine Hansberry (United States of America)
The Tin Drum by Günter Grass (Germany)
Naked Lunch by William S. Burroughs
The Last of the Just by André Schwarz-Bart (France)
Goodbye, Columbus by Philip Roth (US)
Zazie in the Metro by Raymond Queneau (France)
In the Labyrinth by Alain Robbe-Grillet
The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner by Alan Sillitoe
Billy Liar by Keith Waterhouse (England)
The Long Day Wanes by Anthony Burgess (England) – trilogy, first volume published in 1956
The Magic Christian by Terry Southern
Genre fiction

The Gormenghast Trilogy by Mervyn Peake (England) – first volume in 1946
The Getaway by Jim Thompson
Plays

The Dumb Waiter and The Caretaker by Harold Pinter
Rhinoceros by Eugène Ionesco

Cold War period, 1960–1989
1960

To Kill a Mockingbird by Harper Lee (US)
The London Trilogy by Colin MacInnes (England) – first volume, Absolute Beginners, published in 1957
Cain's Book by Alexander Trocchi (UK, France, US)
This Sporting Life by David Storey (UK)
A Burnt-Out Case by Graham Greene
Hiroshima Mon Amour by Marguerite Duras (France)
The Ballad of Peckham Rye by Muriel Spark (Scotland)
The Rosy Crucifixion by Henry Miller (US) – trilogy, first volume published 1949
The Sot-Weed Factor by John Barth (US)
The Magician of Lublin by Isaac Bashevis Singer
Non-fiction and Quasi-fiction

The Morning of the Magicians by Louis Pauwels and Jacques Bergier (France) – the 1960s obsession with the occult starts here. Published in English 1963
A Canticle for Leibowitz by Walter M. Miller Jr. (US)
1961

Catch-22 by Joseph Heller (US)
A House for Mr Biswas by V. S. Naipaul (Trinidad, England)
Riders in the Chariot by Patrick White
The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie by Muriel Spark
A Severed Head by Iris Murdoch
Sword of Honour by Evelyn Waugh – trilogy, first volume published in 1952
Revolutionary Road by Richard Yates (US)
Hear Us O Lord from Heaven Thy Dwelling Place by Malcolm Lowry – posthumous
Genre fiction

Solaris by Stanisław Lem (Poland)
Stranger in a Strange Land by Robert A. Heinlein (US)
The Man in the High Castle by Philip K. Dick (US)
1962

One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich by Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn (Russia)
A Clockwork Orange and The Wanting Seed by Anthony Burgess (England)
Pale Fire by Vladimir Nabokov
Island by Aldous Huxley
The Time of the Hero by Mario Vargas Llosa (Peru)
The Golden Notebook by Doris Lessing (Zimbabwe, England)
The Death of Artemio Cruz by Carlos Fuentes (Mexico)
The Alexandria Quartet by Lawrence Durrell – first volume published 1957
Big Sur by Jack Kerouac – the last of the Lost Generation at the end of the Beat Generation
Genre fiction

The IPCRESS File by Len Deighton (England) – first of the Harry Palmer novels
Non-fiction

Silent Spring by Rachel Carson (US) – the first major popular study on the deterioration of the environment
1963

V. by Thomas Pynchon (US)
The Bell Jar by Sylvia Plath (US, England)
Hopscotch by Julio Cortázar ([Argentina](1862))
One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest by Ken Kesey (US)
The Collector by John Fowles (England)
The Lowlife by Alexander Baron (England)
Cat's Cradle by Kurt Vonnegut (US)
Genre fiction

Planet of the Apes by Pierre Boulle (France)
The Spy Who Came in from the Cold by John le Carré (England)
The Grifters by Jim Thompson
Non-fiction

The Truce by Primo Levi
1964

Herzog by Saul Bellow
A Single Man by Christopher Isherwood
Last Exit to Brooklyn by Hubert Selby (US)
The Spire by William Golding (England)
Nothing Like the Sun by Anthony Burgess
Atmaprakash by Sunil Gangopadhyay (India)
Genre fiction

Charlie and the Chocolate Factory by Roald Dahl (UK)
The Three Stigmata of Palmer Eldritch by Philip K. Dick (US)
Little Big Man by Thomas Berger (US)
Non-fiction

Understanding Media by Marshall McLuhan (Canada)
1965

The Magus by John Fowles
The Interpreters by Wole Soyinka (Nigeria)
Cosmicomics by Italo Calvino (Italy)
The Painted Bird by Jerzy Kosinski (Poland, US)
Here We Go Round the Mulberry Bush by Hunter Davies (England) – the kitchen sink novel mutates into the swinging 1960s novel
Genre fiction

The Cyberiad by Stanisław Lem
Plays

Marat/Sade by Peter Weiss (Germany, Sweden)
Tango by Sławomir Mrożek (Poland)
Poetry

Briggflatts by Basil Bunting
Non-fiction and Quasi-fiction

The Kandy-Kolored Tangerine-Flake Streamline Baby by Tom Wolfe (US)
The Autobiography of Malcolm X by Alex Haley (US)
1966

A Man of the People by Chinua Achebe (Nigeria)
Alfie by Bill Naughton (England)
The Comedians by Graham Greene
Wide Sargasso Sea by Jean Rhys
Tremor of Intent by Anthony Burgess
Genre fiction

Pavane by Keith Roberts (England)
The Anti-Death League by Kingsley Amis
Non-fiction and Quasi-fiction

In Cold Blood by Truman Capote
Hell's Angels: The Strange and Terrible Saga of the Outlaw Motorcycle Gangs by Hunter S. Thompson (US)
Been Down So Long It Looks Like Up to Me by Richard Fariña (US)
1967

One Hundred Years of Solitude by Gabriel García Márquez (Colombia)
The Crying of Lot 49 by Thomas Pynchon
The Vendor of Sweets by R. K. Narayan (India)
Poor Cow by Nell Dunn (England)
A Grain of Wheat by Ngũgĩ wa Thiong'o
Non-fiction

In the First Circle by Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn
The Medium is the Message by Marshall McLuhan and Quentin Fiore
1968

Cocksure by Mordecai Richler (Canada)
Couples by John Updike (US)
The Public Image by Muriel Spark
Lunar Caustic by Malcolm Lowry – posthumous
The Abyss by Marguerite Yourcenar
Non-fiction and quasi-fiction

Cancer Ward by Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn
The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test by Tom Wolfe
The Armies of the Night and Miami and the Siege of Chicago by Norman Mailer
Bomb Culture by Jeff Nuttall (England)
Slouching Towards Bethlehem by Joan Didion (US)
The Teachings of Don Juan by Carlos Castaneda (US)
1969

Portnoy's Complaint by Philip Roth
The French Lieutenant's Woman by John Fowles
A Void by Georges Perec (France)
Passacaille by Robert Pinget (France)
Dark as the Grave wherein my Friend is Laid by Malcolm Lowry – posthumous
Genre fiction

Barefoot in the Head by Brian Aldiss
The Final Programme by Michael Moorcock (England, US)
Slaughterhouse-Five by Kurt Vonnegut (US)
The Godfather by Mario Puzo (US)
Non-fiction and Quasi-fiction

Papillon by Henri Charrière (France)
The View Over Atlantis by John Michell (England)
1970

Play It as It Lays by Joan Didion
Mr. Sammler's Planet by Saul Bellow
Being There by Jerzy Kosiński
October Ferry to Gabriola by Malcolm Lowry – posthumous
Aranyer Din Ratri by Sunil Gangopadhyay
Genre fiction

The Hot Rock by Donald E. Westlake (US)
Deliverance by James Dickey (US)
Non-fiction and Quasi-fiction

The Female Eunuch by Germaine Greer (Australia, England)
Groupie by Jenny Fabian (England)
Playpower by Richard Neville (Australia, England)
Revolt into Style by George Melly (England)
Soledad Brother by George Jackson (US) – prison letters
Soul on Ice by Eldridge Cleaver (US)
1971

In a Free State by V. S. Naipaul (Trinidad, England)
M/F by Anthony Burgess
Our Gang by Philip Roth
The Dice Man by Luke Rhinehart (US)
Another Roadside Attraction by Tom Robbins (US)
Genre fiction

The Day of the Jackal by Frederick Forsyth (England)
Non-fiction and Quasi-fiction

The Happy Hooker by Xaviera Hollander (Indonesia, Netherlands)
Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas by Hunter S. Thompson
1972

The Infernal Desire Machines of Doctor Hoffman by Angela Carter (England)
Invisible Cities by Italo Calvino
G by John Berger (England, France)
The Good for Nothing by Oğuz Atay (Turkey)
Genre fiction

The Friends of Eddie Coyle by George V. Higgins (US)
Jonathan Livingston Seagull by Richard Bach (US)
The Odessa File by Frederick Forsyth
Poetry

Crossing the Water and Winter Trees by Sylvia Plath
1973

Gravity's Rainbow by Thomas Pynchon
Crash by J. G. Ballard (England)
Season of Anomy by Wole Soyinka (Nigeria)
Life Is Elsewhere by Milan Kundera (Czechoslovakia, France)
Sweet Dreams by Michael Frayn (England)
Fear of Flying by Erica Jong (US)
The Great American Novel by Philip Roth
Genre fiction

Frankenstein Unbound by Brian Aldiss
1974

If Beale Street Could Talk by James Baldwin (US)
The Conservationist by Nadine Gordimer (South Africa)
The Fan Man by William Kotzwinkle (US)
The Lost Honour of Katharina Blum by Heinrich Böll
I, the Supreme by Augusto Roa Bastos (Paraguay)
Napoleon Symphony by Anthony Burgess
Myra Breckinridge and Myron by Gore Vidal – first of pair published in 1968
Genre fiction

Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy by John le Carré
Fletch by Gregory Mcdonald (US)
Genre fiction

Jaws by Peter Benchley (US)
Non-fiction and Quasi-fiction

All the President's Men by Bob Woodward and Carl Bernstein (US)
Poetry

Mr. Cogito by Zbigniew Herbert (Poland)
1975

Humboldt's Gift by Saul Bellow
The Deptford Trilogy by Robertson Davies – first volume published 1970
Dead Babies by Martin Amis (England)
The Autumn of the Patriarch by Gabriel García Márquez
The History Man by Malcolm Bradbury (England)
The Periodic Table by Primo Levi – short stories
Genre fiction

Watership Down by Richard Adams (England)
The Choirboys by Joseph Wambaugh (US)
Shōgun by James Clavell (England, US)
'Salem's Lot by Stephen King (US)
1976

Ragtime by EL Doctorow (US)
Genre fiction

Interview with the Vampire by Anne Rice (US)
Non-fiction and quasi-fiction

Roots by Alex Haley
Another Day of Life by Ryszard Kapuściński (Poland)
Poetry

Christmas O Shiter Sanet Guchho (ক্রিসমাস ও শীতের সনেটগুচ্ছ) by Joy Goswami (West Bengal, India)
Drama

Death and the King's Horseman by Wole Soyinka
1977

The Engineer of Human Souls by Josef Škvorecký (Czechoslovakia)
Song of Solomon by Toni Morrison (US)
1978

Success by Martin Amis
The Sea, the Sea by Iris Murdoch
Lanark: A Life in Four Books by Alasdair Gray (Scotland)
Life A User's Manual by Georges Perec
The Book of Laughter and Forgetting by Milan Kundera
Jake's Thing by Kingsley Amis
The World According to Garp by John Irving (US)
1985 by Anthony Burgess
Horatio Stubbs by Brian Aldiss – trilogy, first volume published in 1970
Non-fiction and Quasi-fiction

The Emperor by Ryszard Kapuściński
Genre fiction

Rumpole of the Bailey by John Mortimer (England)
1979

A Bend in the River by V. S. Naipaul
The Unlimited Dream Company by J. G. Ballard
Sophie's Choice by William Styron (US)
Non-fiction and Quasi-fiction

The White Album by Joan Didion
The Right Stuff by Tom Wolfe (US)
1980

The Name of the Rose by Umberto Eco
Pascali's Island by Barry Unsworth (England)
Earthly Powers by Anthony Burgess
1981

Midnight's Children by Salman Rushdie (India, UK)
The Comfort of Strangers by Ian McEwan (England)
The White Hotel by D. M. Thomas (England)
Chronicle of a Death Foretold by Gabriel García Márquez
What We Talk About When We Talk About Love by Raymond Carver (US) – short stories
Genre fiction

The Red Dragon by Thomas Harris (US)
Gorky Park by Martin Cruz Smith (England, Russia)
Non-fiction

Conversations with an Executioner by Kazimierz Moczarski (Poland)
1982

Schindler's Ark by Thomas Keneally (Australia)
An Ice-Cream War by William Boyd (Ghana, Scotland)
The Color Purple by Alice Walker (US)
A Wild Sheep Chase by Haruki Murakami
Genre fiction

Prizzi's Honor by Richard Condon
Limes Inferior by Janusz A. Zajdel (Poland)
1983

Waterland by Graham Swift (England)
Shame by Salman Rushdie
Erev by Eli Schechtman (USSR, Israel)
Genre fiction

The Colour of Magic by Terry Pratchett (England) – first book of the Discworld series
1984

Money by Martin Amis
Bright Lights, Big City by Jay McInerney (US)
The Unbearable Lightness of Being by Milan Kundera
Flaubert's Parrot by Julian Barnes (England)
Nights at the Circus by Angela Carter
Enderby by Anthony Burgess – tetralogy, first volume published in 1963
The Witches of Eastwick by John Updike
Non-fiction

Empire of the Sun by J. G. Ballard
1985

Sei Somoy by Sunil Gangopadhyay (India)
White Noise by Don DeLillo (US)
Less than Zero by Bret Easton Ellis (US)
Oranges Are Not the Only Fruit by Jeanette Winterson (England)
The Accidental Tourist by Anne Tyler (US)
Hawksmoor by Peter Ackroyd (England)
Illywhacker by Peter Carey (Australia)
The Kingdom of the Wicked by Anthony Burgess

Genre fiction

L.A. Quartet by James Ellroy (US) – tetralogy, first volume published 1984
The Handmaid's Tale by Margaret Atwood – (US)
1986

Slaves of New York by Tama Janowitz (US)
The Old Devils by Kingsley Amis
An Artist of the Floating World by Kazuo Ishiguro (Japan, UK)
Non-fiction

Decolonising the Mind: The Politics of Language in African Literature by Ngũgĩ wa Thiong'o
1987

The Satanic Verses by Salman Rushdie
The Bonfire of the Vanities by Tom Wolfe
Anthills of the Savannah by Chinua Achebe
The Alchemist by Paulo Coelho  (Brasil)
Genre fiction

Presumed Innocent by Scott Turow (US)
1988

Mother London by Michael Moorcock
Libra by Don DeLillo
Oscar and Lucinda by Peter Carey (Australia)
Love in the Time of Cholera by Gabriel García Márquez
Genre fiction

Sprawl by William Gibson (Canada, US) – trilogy, first volume published 1984
1989

London Fields by Martin Amis
Foucault's Pendulum by Umberto Eco
The Remains of the Day by Kazuo Ishiguro
To the Ends of the Earth by William Golding – trilogy, first volume published 1980

Ghumiyecho, Jhaupata? (ঘুমিয়েছো, ঝাউপাতা?) by Joy Goswami
The Book of Evidence by John Banville (Ireland)
The Trick of It by Michael Frayn

1990s
The English Patient by Michael Ondaatje
Slam poetry
1990

The New York Trilogy by Paul Auster (US) – first volume published 1985
The Black Book by Orhan Pamuk (Turkey)
Restoration by Rose Tremain (England)
Possession by A. S. Byatt (England)
The Buddha of Suburbia by Hanif Kureishi (England)
Dirty Weekend by Helen Zahavi (England)
Genre fiction

Devil in a Blue Dress by Walter Mosley (US)
Good Omens by Neil Gaiman and Terry Pratchett
1991

Generation X: Tales for an Accelerated Culture by Douglas Coupland (Canada)
1994

Blood of Elves by Andrzej Sapkowski (Poland)
1996

Infinite Jest by David Foster Wallace (US)
Prathama Alo by Sunil Gangopadhyay (India)
1997

Underworld by Don DeLillo (US)
American Pastoral by Philip Roth
Nightmare by Zlatko Topčić
Into Thin Air by Jon Krakauer
Genre fiction

Northern Lights by Philip Pullman (UK) – first in His Dark Materials trilogy
Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone by J. K. Rowling (UK) – first in series

See also
American literature
Experimental literature
French literature of the 20th century
List of 20th-century writers
Literary modernism
Twentieth-century English literature
20th-century music
20th century in poetry
Electronic literature

References
External links

Discovering Literature: 20th century at the British Library