3134
American Women quarters
The American Women quarters program is a series of quarters featuring notable women in U.S. history, commemorating the centennial of the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The United States Mint is issuing five designs each year from 2022 to 2025 for 20 total designs. One woman will be honored on the reverse of each coin, selected for "contributions to the United States in a wide spectrum of accomplishments and fields, including but not limited to suffrage, civil rights, abolition, government, humanities, science, space, and arts." The obverse depicts [George Washington](3100) with a new design. Most of the women featured have been from ethnic minority groups.
The program was authorized by the Circulating Collectible Coin Redesign Act of 2020, sponsored by Representatives Barbara Lee and Anthony Gonzalez. The original proposal was for 56 quarters, honoring one woman from each state and territory, but with a set of circulating coins intended to be released in 2026 for the United States Semiquincentennial, it was amended to be shorter. One of the five quarters in that set will also feature a woman. It replaced an alternative proposal of quarters featuring animals or endangered species. It will be followed in 2027–2030 with a series depicting youth sports.
In addition to circulating coins, the series is also minted as a silver proof set.
It succeeds the [America the Beautiful quarters](3130) and Washington Crossing the Delaware quarter. Some coin collectors were critical of the "seemingly unending" proposal to continue to issue five new quarter designs every year for a third decade. Many numismatists are more interested in redesigns of other denominations and less frequent releases.

Designs
Obverse
Laura Gardin Fraser's portrait of [George Washington](3100), which was originally submitted in 1931, was selected by the Commission of Fine Arts and Citizens Coinage Advisory Committee to appear on the obverse of the American Women quarters.  The right-facing bust had been used for the 1999 [George Washington](3100) half eagle for the 200th anniversary of Washington's death.

Reverse
The United States Secretary of the Treasury selects the women featured for the series in consultation with the Smithsonian Institution's American Women's History Initiative, the National Women's History Museum, and the Congressional Caucus for Women's Issues. Recommendations for women honorees were solicited from the public in 2021.

2022
Honorees featured in 2022 are:

Maya Angelou, the first Black woman featured on U.S. currency. Designed by Emily Damstra, who said her depiction of Angelou "conveys the passionate way she lived". She indicated that the bird in flight that silhouetted Angelou's arms was modeled on a Purple martin, which is native to Angelou's home state of Arkansas, and symbolized her autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings. Oprah Winfrey called the design "a true treasure" and "an incredible moment" to commemorate her friend and poet's life. Because a bust portrait was not permitted, Damstra chose to limit the details in the quarter, balancing negative space.
Sally Ride, the first LGBT person on U.S. currency. Her partner Tam O'Shaughnessy said Ride's design by the Space Shuttle's window reflected her quote, "But when I wasn't working, I was usually at a window looking down at Earth." It shows her wearing a patch with an element Ride designed for the STS-7 mission that represented her being the first American woman in space. The design was unveiled at the 2021 Space Symposium.
Wilma Mankiller; design released at an event at the Cherokee National Capitol. Cherokee Nation Principal Chief Chuck Hoskin Jr. said, "Chief Mankiller was the voice that first elevated Native American tribes and tribal issues in this country and served as the first female Chief in a role dominated by men during a time that the Cherokee Nation was first getting its footing after decades of suppression by the U.S. Government... She fought for civil rights and equality, and self-sufficiency for the Cherokee people, and was the anchor establishing what has now become the largest tribal health care system in the country. We are so proud she is forever honored on this coin by the U.S. Mint."
Adelina Otero-Warren, the first Hispanic American on U.S. currency.
Anna May Wong, the first Asian American on U.S. currency.

2023
Honorees featured in 2023 are:

Bessie Coleman; design released at an event at the Federal Aviation Administration. FAA Deputy Administrator Brad Mims said the coin "is a valuable symbol of an important chapter in U.S. aviation history."
Jovita Idar; design released at an event at the University of Texas at San Antonio.
Edith Kanakaʻole, the first native Hawaiian on U.S. currency. The design was released at an event at the University of Hawaiʻi Hilo, where Kanakaʻole previously taught. Designer Emily Damstra said, "It was a joy to become aware of Edith Kanakaʻole’s legacy as I developed a design for her quarter... I came to understand that her deep connection to the land—her home in Hawaiʻi near the Maunakea volcano—played a large role in her life and work. To best honor the various ways she made an impact, I felt that the design should emphasize her relationship to that environment."
Eleanor Roosevelt
Maria Tallchief, who also appears on the 2023 Sacagawea dollar. Designer Ben Sowards said, "Although her artistry, precision, and technical skill made her one of the most renowned ballerinas of her time, it is Maria Tallchief’s courage, perseverance, and strength of character that I hope are evident in the design... Her legacy continues to inspire us to pursue our dreams."

2024
Honorees featured in 2024 are:

Pauli Murray; Murray's niece Rosita Stevens-Holsey said, "When I see my aunt's face looking out through the letters of the word 'hope', it brings to mind that she never lost hope in a society and world that needed to change to embrace the rights of all humans.  Her selection as one of the honorees is validation and a testament to more than 50 years of achievements in social justice, women's rights, civil rights, and human rights."
Patsy Takemoto Mink; the design honors Mink's work on the Title IX Amendment of the Higher Education Act, renamed the Patsy T. Mink Equal Opportunity in Education Act in 2002.
Mary Edwards Walker; Oswego Town Historian George DeMass, who advised the U.S. Mint on the design, said of the process, "The committees were so concerned about accuracy, which I’m very glad... They would ask questions like, ‘Do you happen to know what hairstyle she was wearing during the war?’ Which, you know, was 150 years ago, but fortunately we had pictures."
Celia Cruz, the first Afro-Latina on U.S. currency. Cruz's former manager Omer Pardillo said, "It's a significant honor to become the first Afro-Latina, who, despite her humble beginnings, managed to captivate the world with her exceptional talent and charisma... All Latinos should be very proud of this enormous accomplishment as Celia not only represents Cubans, but Latinos all over the world... She belonged to the world."
Zitkala-Ša

2025
Honorees to be featured in 2025 are:

Ida B. Wells
Juliette Gordon Low
Vera Rubin
Stacey Milbern
Althea Gibson

List of designs
See also
United States cent mintage figures
Lincoln cent mintage figures
United States nickel mintage figures
United States quarter mintage figures
Washington quarter mintage figures
50 State quarter mintage figures
America the Beautiful quarter mintage figures
American Women quarters
United States half dollar mintage figures
Kennedy half dollar mintage figures
American Silver Eagle mintage figures

References
External links
United States Mint
National Women's History Museum
Smithsonian American Women's History Museum
Pub. L. 116–330 (text) (PDF)