314
American Pet Products Association
The American Pet Products Association (APPA) is a not-for-profit industry association founded in 1958 and headquartered in Stamford, Connecticut. The APPA represents more than 1,000 pet product manufacturers, importers of pet products, and suppliers of products for non-pet livestock as well.
APPA supports the interests of its members through public policy, public affairs, and animal awareness. In 2008, it dropped the word Manufacturers from its name.

Events and Expos
Global Pet Expo
The APPA organizes the Global Pet Expo annually in Orlando, Florida. It is a B2B trade show for the pet industry in which over 6,000 buyers from various businesses establish relationships with brands and place wholesale orders. This includes large chains such as Petsmart and Petco as well as small, independently owned pet stores.
The 2024 expo featured a recording breaking 1,100+ companies with 3,400 booths with over 20,000 attendees from over 85 countries. The 2024 Global Pet Expo also had a $45 million economic impact in the Metropolitan Orlando area in Florida.

The Pet Summit
APPA acquired The Pet Summit in 2023. It was founded by Paige Chernick and Megan Marcari in 2020 for those in the pet industry to come together for education, to network and build a community. The company hosts various classes, workshops, panels, Q&A session and more to support pet industry brand owners and others on the community. They also work to support media such as bloggers, social media managers and influencers as well as bring them all together.  It is now put on simultaneously with Global Pet Expo.

National Pet Owners Survey
APPA has been conducting the National Pet Owners Survey (NPOS) since 1988, providing comprehensive consumer research on pet owners. The survey includes in-depth data on consumer behavior, product and service consumption, and lifestyle and media habits. The survey was previously issued biannually but switched to annually in 2022. It's offered for free to APPA members or can be purchased.

References
External links
Official website
National Pet Owners Survey
The Pet Summit
Global Pet Expo