32
Bombay cat
The Bombay cat is a short-haired breed of domestic cat. Bombays are glossy solid black cats with a muscular build, and have characteristic large bright copper-golden eyes. The breed is named after the Indian city of Bombay (Mumbai), referring to the habitat of the Indian black leopard.
There exist two different variants of Bombay breed; the American Bombay and the British Bombay. American-type Bombays were developed by crossbreeding sable American Burmese and black [American Shorthair](10) cats, to produce a cat of mostly Burmese type, but with a sleek, panther-like black coat with copper-golden eyes. British-type Bombays are solid black-coloured Asian Self cats under the Asian group, a group of European Burmese and chinchilla Persian crosses. The British-type Bombay originated from three mismatings of European Burmese with black domestic short-haired cats. 
Both types of Bombay cats are selectively bred by breeders and pedigreed in multiple major cat fancier and breeder organisations. Similar to other officially recognised cat breeds, the term "Bombay" is only meant to be used for cats from this specific breed, which are by definition all purebred cats with a known and formally registered ancestry, also known as the cat's pedigree or "paperwork".

Breed registration
History
The breed was developed by Nikki Horner, a breeder from Louisville, Kentucky, who, starting in 1958, attempted to create a breed of cat that resembled a miniature black panther. The first attempt was a failure, but the second, in 1965, was successful. The breed was officially recognised and registered by the [Cat](54) Fanciers' Association (CFA) in 1970 and The International [Cat](54) Association (TICA) in 1979.

Popularity
The Bombay cat is a relatively rare breed among pedigree cats, both in the American and British types. The British type are pedigreed as Asian Self cats under the Asian group. In 2023, only 160 kittens of the total Asian group were pedigreed with the Governing Council of the [Cat](54) Fancy (GCCF). 
The American type is relatively more popular compared to the British type. In France, an average of 45 Bombay kittens were born yearly between 2003 and 2022. PawPeds is the largest cat pedigree database worldwide. As of June 2024, there were a total of 1,717 (including deceased cats) Bombay cats registered with PawPeds, and 406 of them were born after January 2000.

Appearance
The Bombay is described as the "patent leather kid with the new penny eyes." The Bombay is a short-haired breed of domestic cat, closely related to the Burmese. Bombay cats are characterised as having an all-black coat, including the whiskers, and black skin, including the soles, nose leather and mouth. The close-lying, sleek and glossy black coat is of mature cats is coloured to the roots with no paling (exceptions are allowed in juvenile cats less than 2 years old). The eyes are always copper-golden coloured, and green eyes are not allowed.The Bombay has a medium-sized, Oriental-type body build that is muscular. Their weight ranges between 2.5–5 kg (5.5–11.0 lb), with males typically being heavier than females.

Breed standard
Body: Medium size, graceful and elongated Oriental-type body. Elegant tail of medium length.

Head: Rounded heads with no sharp angles, and short. The shape is smooth. The muzzle is short, with a moderate nose “stop” which is visible (not a break). The short-nosed head shape is similar to the American-type Burmese. The medium-sized ears are wide-set, straight, and rounded at the tips.
Eyes: The large, round eyes are set far apart and are always copper-coloured, but can range from bright orange to warm golden. Green eyes are not allowed.
Coat: Short, dense and shiny, tight to the body, with a lacquered sheen. Only completely solid black coloured coats are allowed.
Weight: For females, the average is 2.5–3.5 kg (6–8 lb). For males, the average is 3.5–5 kg (8–11 lb).

Health
A healthy Bombay has an average lifespan of 15 years, and some have been known to live up to 20. They can have some nasal and sinus problems, and gingivitis. Their food intake should be controlled to avoid overfeeding.

Temperament
The personality of the Bombay tends to be highly social, is marked by strong attachment to families, and is typified by craving attention. As a breed, these characteristics make them highly suitable for children.
Bombay cats are happy and comfortable being strictly indoor cats, and can comfortably live in a single room apartment, so long as all of their needs are met. They prefer quiet surroundings.

References
External links
 Media related to Bombay cats at Wikimedia Commons