343
Bhairava
Bhairava (Sanskrit: भैरव, lit. 'frightful'), or Kala Bhairava, is a Shaivite and Vajrayāna deity worshipped by Hindus and Buddhists. In Shaivism, he is a powerful manifestation, or avatar, of Shiva. In the tradition of Kashmir Shaivism, Bhairava represents the Supreme Reality, synonymous to Para Brahman. Generally in Hinduism, Bhairava is also called Dandapani ("he who holds the danda in his hand"), as he holds a rod or danda to punish sinners, and Svaśva, meaning, "he whose vehicle is a dog". In Vajrayana Buddhism, he is considered a fierce emanation of boddhisatva Mañjuśrī, and also called Heruka, Vajrabhairava, Mahākāla and Yamantaka.
Bhairava is worshipped throughout India, Nepal, Indonesia, Sri Lanka, and Japan, as well as in Tibetan Buddhism.

Etymology
Bhairava originates from the word bhīru, which means "fearsome". Bhairava means "terribly fearsome form". It is also known as one who destroys fear or one who is beyond fear.

Hinduism
Legend
The legend of the origin of Bhairava is traced back to a conversation between Brahma and Vishnu described in the Shiva Purana. 
Shiva manifested as a pillar of light to settle the dispute of superiority between Brahma and Vishnu. Brahma dishonestly proclaimed his victory, stating that he had discovered the higher end of the pillar of light. To punish him for his dishonesty and arrogance, Shiva produced Bhairava from the region between his brows. When Bhairava sought instruction from Shiva, the deity directed him to "worship Brahma with his sharp-pointed quick-moving sword". Bhairava decapitated the fifth head of Brahma for uttering the falsehood. Vishnu interceded on Brahma's behalf and sought mercy, and the two deities then worshipped Shiva.
Having committed the sin of brahmahatya (the murder of a Brahmin) by decapitating Brahma, Bhairava was pursued by the terrible female personification of the sin. The skull of Brahma was still attached to his hand. To expiate himself of the sin, Bhairava roamed the three worlds. He visited Vaikuntha, where he was honoured by Vishnu and Lakshmi. When Bhairava visited Kashi, the city of the liberated, Brahmahatya left him, and the skull of Brahma was released from his hand. 
In another legend, Brahma is regarded to have stated to Vishnu to worship him as the supreme creator of the universe. Noting that both Shiva and he had five heads, Brahma came to believe that he was identical to Shiva and was equal to his powers. When his arrogance started to affect his role in the universe, Shiva threw a lock of his hair from his head. This assumed the form of Bhairava, who decapitated one of Brahma's heads. When the skull (kapala) of Brahma was held in the hand of Bhairava, the creator deity's ego was destroyed and he became enlightened. In the form of Bhairava, Shiva is said to guard each of the Shakti Pithas (A group of temples dedicated to the goddess Shakti). Each Shakti Pitha is accompanied by a temple dedicated to Bhairava.

Depiction
In Kashmir Shaivism, Bhairava is the ultimate form of manifestation.

Trika System
Trika or Kashmiri Shaivism names the Absolute Reality (Para Brahman) as Bhairava. The Vijñāna Bhairava Tantra is a key Tantra text of the Trika System. Cast as a discourse between the god Bhairava and his consort Bhairavi it briefly presents 112 Tantric meditation methods or centering techniques (Dharana). The text is a chapter from the Rudrayamala Tantra, a Bhairava Agama. Bhairavi, the goddess, asks Bhairava to reveal the essence of the way to realization of the highest reality. In his answer Bhairava describes 112 ways to enter into the universal and transcendental state of consciousness. References to it appear throughout the literature of Trika, Kashmir Shaivism, indicating that it was considered to be an important text in the schools of Kashmir Shaiva philosophy and Trika.

List of Bhairavas
The list of manifestations of Shiva:

Buddhism
Buddhism also adopted Bhairava (Tibetan: 'Jigs byed; Chinese: Buwei) as a deity and a dharmapala or dharma protector. The various buddhist forms of Bhairava (variously called Herukas, Vajrabhairava, Mahākāla and Yamantaka) are considered fierce deities and yidams (tantric meditational deity) in Tibetan Buddhism. They also have their own set of Buddhist tantras, the Vajrabhairava tantras. According to Tibetan tradition, these tantras were revealed to Lalitavajra in Oddiyana in the tenth century. 
These texts play a particularly important role in the Sarma (new translation) traditions of Tibetan Buddhism, especially among the Gelug school where Vajrabhairava is one of the three central highest yoga tantra practices of the lineage. 
Bhairava - Mahakala is also popular in Mongolia as a protector deity and was also popular among the Manchus. 
The deity is also central to Newar Buddhism. The tantric practices associated with Bhairava focus on the transformation of anger and hatred into understanding.

Worship
Temples or shrines to Bhairava are present within or near most Jyotirlinga temples.  There are also the sacred twelve shrines dedicated to Shiva which can be found all across India including the Kashi Vishwanath Temple, Varanasi and the Kal Bhairava temple, Ujjain. The Patal Bhairava and Vikrant Bhairava shrines are located in Ujjain as well.
Gorat Kashmiris are known to worship Bhairava during Shivratri. The renowned Hindu reformer, Adi Sankara composed a hymn on Kala Bhairava called "Sri Kalabhairava Ashtakam" in the city of Kashi.

Observances
Bhairava Ashtami, commemorating the day Kala Bhairava appeared on earth, is celebrated on Krishna paksha Ashtami of the Margashirsha month of the Hindu calendar. It is a day filled with special prayers and rituals.

Iconography
Bhairava is depicted as being ornamented with a range of twisted serpents, which serve as earrings, bracelets, anklets, and sacred thread (yajnopavita). He wears a tiger skin and a ritual apron composed of human bones.  Bhairava has a dog (shvana) as his divine vahana (vehicle). Bhairavi is a fierce and terrifying aspect of the Devi who is virtually indistinguishable from Kali, with the exception of her particular identification as the consort of Bhairava.
Bhairava himself has eight manifestations called the Ashta Bhairava:

Asitāṅga Bhairava
Ruru Bhairava
Chaṇḍa Bhairava
Krodha Bhairava
Unmatta Bhairava
Kapala Bhairava
Bhīṣaṇa Bhairava
Saṃhāra Bhairava
Kala Bhairava is conceptualized as the guru-natha (teacher and lord) of the planetary deity Shani (Saturn).
Bhairava is known as Bhairavar or Vairavar in Tamil, where he is often presented as a grama devata or village guardian who safeguards the devotee in eight directions (ettu tikku). Known in Sinhalese as Bahirawa, he is said to protect treasures. He is the main deity worshipped by the Aghora sect.

Temples
Thennaga Kasi Bairavar Temple is a Hindu temple dedicated to Lord Bairavar, a fierce form of Lord Shiva. It is located in Erode, Tamil Nadu, India. This temple is renowned for its unique architectural style and spiritual significance.
Bhairava is an important deity of the Newars. All the traditional settlements of Newars have at least one temple of Bhairava. Most of the temples of Bhairava in Nepal are maintained by Newar priests. There are several Bhairava temples in the Kathmandu valley.
In south Karnataka, Lord Sri Kalabhairaveshwara is present as Kshetra Palaka in Sri Adichunchanagiri Hills.
Kala Bhairava temples can also be found around Shaktipeeths. It is said that Shiva allocated the job of guarding each of the 52 Shaktipeeths to one Bhairava. There are said to be 52 forms of Bhairava, which are considered a manifestation of Shiva himself.  Traditionally, Kala Bhairava is the Grama devata in the rural villages of Maharashtra, where he is referred to as "Bhairava/Bhairavnath" and "Bairavar". In Karnataka, Lord Bhairava is the supreme God for the Hindu community commonly referred to as Vokkaligas (Gowdas). Especially in the Jogi Vokkaliga, he is considered the caretaker and punisher. Shri Kala Bhairava Nath Swami Temple of Madhya Pradesh is also popular.

See also
Adichunchanagiri Hills
Akash Bhairava
Bhairab Naach
Kshetrapala
Muthappan
Sirkazhi

References
Cited sources
Hiltebeitel, Alf, ed. (1989). Criminal Gods and Demon Devotees: Essays on the Guardians of Popular Hinduism. Albany: State University of New York Press. ISBN 0-88706-982-7.

External links

Shri Kala Bhairava Mandir, New Delhi Archived 29 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine