3525
Antonio Campos (director)
Antonio Campos (born August 24, 1983) is an American filmmaker and producer best known for directing films such as Afterschool (2008), Simon Killer (2012), Christine (2016), and The Devil All the Time (2020). Campos is also known for creating the Max biographical crime series The Staircase (2022).

Early life
Campos was born in New York City. His father is the Brazilian journalist Lucas Mendes, while his mother is an American producer, Rose Ganguzza. His maternal grandparents were Italian. In 2002, he was named a Presidential Scholar of the Arts as part of the U.S. Presidential Scholars Program. He is also a  YoungArts alumnus.

Career
Campos made his feature-length debut on Afterschool, which had its world premiere at the Cannes Film Festival. The film was later acquired by IFC Films. It was released in a limited release on October 2, 2009. Campos then went on to direct Simon Killer. The film stars Brady Corbet and had its world premiere at the Sundance Film Festival. IFC Films acquired distribution rights to the film, and opened in a limited release in April 2013.
Campos's third feature, Christine, which starred Rebecca Hall, had its world premiere at the Sundance Film Festival. The film was acquired by The Orchard, and released in a limited release on October 14, 2016. Campos was attached to direct a prequel to The Omen for 20th Century Fox. Campos directed the pilot episode of The Sinner, starring Jessica Biel and Christopher Abbott, and also served as an executive producer. The pilot was later ordered to series. He also directed episode 8 of Marvel's The Punisher. In 2020, Campos wrote and directed the psychological thriller The Devil All the Time, which was released in September on Netflix.
Apart from being a director and screenwriter, Campos cofounded the production company Borderline Films, which has produced films such as James White, Katie Says Goodbye, and Martha Marcy May Marlene. In October 2022, it was announced that Campos had been hired as showrunner for an untitled Matt Reeves-produced series set in Arkham Asylum, in addition to serving as director and an executive producer. In December 2023, James Gunn, CEO of DC Studios, confirmed the series would take place in the DC Universe. In July it reached that the show was no longer happening with Campos at the helm.

Filmography
Short film
Feature film
Producer

Executive producer

Television
References
External links
Antonio Campos at IMDb