3536
BRIT School
The BRIT School is a British performing and creative arts school located in Selhurst, [Croydon](3591), England, with a mandate to provide education and vocational training for the performing arts, music, music technology, theatre, musical theatre, dance, applied theatre, production arts and the creative arts film and media production, interactive digital design, visual arts and design. Selective in its intake but free to attend, the school is notable for its celebrity alumni.
Opened on 22 October 1991 under the CTC programme, the school is funded by the British Government with support from the British Record Industry Trust (BRIT) and other charity partners and donations and maintains an independent school status from the local education authority.

History
Mark Featherstone-Witty had been inspired by Alan Parker's 1980s film Fame to create a secondary school specialising in the performing arts. By the time he started trying to raise money through the School for Performing Arts Trust (SPA), he had refined a novel integrated curriculum. He approached Sir Richard Branson to be the project champion who agreed, on the condition that other record companies chipped in. As it happened, the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) were concerned with home taping and realised they had no political influence to bring the necessary pressure to bear. The then Conservative government needed to give impetus to their flagging City Technology College scheme.
For over 30 years, the BRIT School has been the beneficiary of funding from the British record industry, with a substantial annual contribution from the proceeds of the Brit Awards, administered via the record industry's charity, the BRIT Trust.
In 2012, the school expanded acquiring part of the former Selhurst High School building next door. Three new courses, Production Arts, Interactive Digital Design and Community Arts Practise (now Applied Theatre) were introduced to coincide with this. There are currently 1400 plus Students on roll. The school's former principal Sir Nick Williams was knighted in the New Years Honours List 2013 for services to education.
The school celebrated its 30th birthday in 2022 and was awarded a PRS Music heritage award for shaping UK Art and culture for 30 years.

Educational focus
The school was founded in 1991 under the auspices of the City Technology Colleges (CTC) initiative with sponsorship from the British Record Industry Trust (BRIT). Each year the BRIT Awards Music Ceremony raises money, some of which is used to help the continuing sponsorship of the school along with other music charities.
The school recognises that most of its students intend to make a career in the arts, entertainment and communications industries, but the school expects all to follow full-time courses to completion. It has two professional theatres, the Obie Theatre, which can seat audiences of up to 324 and standing audiences up to 500; and the BRIT Theatre, which opened in January 2012 and seats audiences of up to 280. There are also various dance studios, musical theatre studios, and TV and radio studios.
YouTube Music funded a new Television Studio that opened in 2019 for Film & Media Production students. This was in response to the student-run show "The BRIT Live" which airs on the BRIT School's YouTube channel, giving the students their own studio and control room to broadcast from.

Entry requirements
Entry to any of the school's courses is initially by application. If applicants meet the initial entry criteria, they may then be invited to interview or workshop in their chosen focus (strand) (either film and media production (FMP), Applied Theatre, dance, interactive digital design, music, music technology, musical theatre, production arts, theatre, or visual arts & design), for sixth-form entry students, plus a meeting with relevant tutors.  Entry to the music course also includes aural and music theory tests and an audition, with entry to the dance, theatre, visual art & design, and musical theatre courses also including audition rounds. The school is known for being selective in its admissions and though it has a large catchment area, students outside this area are only granted a place if they show unusual merit.
A 2011 [BBC News](178) article discussed whether students who are accepted by the school get an unfair advantage in creative arts industries over those who did not.

Curriculum
The school teaches the following course:

Notable alumni
References
External links
Official website
The BRIT Trust