3573
Chiltern Firehouse
The Chiltern Firehouse is a restaurant and boutique hotel located at 1 Chiltern Street in the Marylebone area of [London](2275), England. It occupies the Grade II listed building of the former Marylebone Fire Station, originally known as the Manchester Square Fire Station. It is owned by André Balazs, an American hotelier, who also owns the Chateau Marmont in Los Angeles, California. The head chef is Luke Hunns.

Manchester Square Fire Station
The building was constructed in 1889 as the Manchester Square Fire Station, since Manchester Square is nearby. It was designed by the [London](2275) County Council Architect's Department "in the Vulliamy manner". "Red brick with stone dressings; tiled roof. Free Tudor-Gothic style". It was built as a fire station, and it was one of the first fire stations in [London](2275). The original architect was Robert Pearsall.
Later known as the Marylebone Fire Station, it was decommissioned in June 2005 by the [London](2275) Fire and Emergency Planning Authority. For some years afterward, it was in occasional use as an exhibition space for local artists, since there was a long and complex planning process to convert it to a luxury hotel and restaurant. David Archer of Archer Humphryes Architects acted as lead architect for the project.

Chiltern Firehouse hotel and restaurant
In 2013, the Chiltern Firehouse opened as a 26-suite hotel and 200-seat restaurant. It was the first British establishment by American hotelier André Balazs.

Interior
The restaurant features an open kitchen, and the interior was designed by Paris-based Studio KO. The Independent's restaurant critic Tracey MacLeod described the interior by saying that "they've kept the huge firehouse doors, giving an almost rustic feel, while cleverly-placed mirrors create the illusion of infinite space." [London](2275)ist reported: The look of the space is unique. A ceiling clad with fabric that would feel at home on the seats of the Bakerloo line, carpeted corridors your gran would like, and a scattering of pot plants and nic-nacs lend a feel that's simultaneously homely and nothing at all like a home you could imagine. Grace Dent of the [London](2275) Evening Standard described a "glorious dining room that is part classic French brasserie, part industrial—supporting pillars, a fireman's pole and low-hanging lights—and part chintzy in-joke with pot plants, ornaments, thick hallway carpets and marble tables."

Food hygiene failings
The Times reported in August 2014 that officers from Westminster City Council's food safety team had awarded the restaurant only two stars out of a possible five when the restaurant was inspected. Inspectors had found dirty surfaces, food served below safe temperatures, dirty fly screens, poor access to hot water and soap, and broken glass in a freezer. A former chef who spoke to The Times said: "Upstairs the diners could see the chefs working away in the open-plan kitchen, but downstairs it was a different story ... We had people using an ironing board to chop herbs on and there was no extraction". The article was accompanied by a photograph of a chef using an ironing board to prepare food. The Chiltern Firehouse commented that the "vast majority" of the problems had been rectified.

Celebrity patronage and criticism
In June 2014, The Daily Telegraph called it "[London](2275)'s hottest celebrity hangout", saying: "Once upon a time, celebrities liked to nibble their lettuce leaves at The Ivy. Then, the place to go for your sushi (and a quick romp in the broom cupboard) was Nobu. These days, it's the Chiltern Firehouse".

The Daily Mirror noted the Firehouse's exclusive reputation, asking: "Fancy booking a table at Chiltern Firehouse? Well unless your name is written on the Hollywood Walk of Fame then you may as well give up!" The Daily Telegraph reported a "rigorous screening process to accept bookings", saying: "Chiltern Firehouse is all about who's who and with the amount of detail gone into creating what has to be one of the loveliest and coolest new places in [London](2275), it's almost justified." MacLeod appeared critical of the exclusivity of the Firehouse, writing: The garage, once home to the fire engines, now revs with the self-congratulatory hum of a fashionable crowd, who have scored a table despite a bookings policy apparently borrowed from the North Korean tourist board. ... Appropriate perhaps, that in keeping with its previous incarnation, the Firehouse seems to operate a strict no-civilians policy. Britta Jaschinski of Time Out said: "Checking in feels a bit like arriving at a Scientology meeting." Bryony Gordon blogged that "there is even a waiting list for the waiting list".
The food, however, has not been universally praised, with Matthew Norman of The Daily Telegraph writing that the:cooking ranges from the merely comforting to the plainly inedible; and which, despite the unstinting efforts of its publicists at Freud Communications to festoon newspaper pages with tidings of its stellar clientele, barely qualifies as the best restaurant on its own premises.
In 2024 Nimrod Kamer made a film about Chiltern Firehouse and Chiltern Street as a whole 1.

References
External links

Official website