3721
Aeacides of Epirus
Aeacides may also refer to Peleus, son of Aeacus, or Achilles, grandson of Aeacus.

Aeacides (Ancient Greek: Αἰακίδης; died 313 BC), King of Epirus (331–316, 313), was a son of King Arybbas and grandson of King Alcetas I.

Family
Aeacides married Phthia, the daughter of Menon of Pharsalus, by whom he had the celebrated son Pyrrhus and two daughters, Deidamia and Troias.

Reign
In 331 BC, on the death of his cousin king Alexander, who was slain in Italy, Aeacides succeeded to the throne of Epirus. In 317 BC he assisted Polyperchon in restoring his cousin Olympias and the five-year-old king Alexander IV to Macedonia. The following year he had to march to the assistance of Olympias, who was hard pressed by Cassander; but the Epirots disliked the military service, rose against Aeacides, and drove him from the kingdom. Pyrrhus, who was then only two years old, was saved by some faithful servants. 
In 313 BC, having become tired of the Macedonian rule, the people of Epirus recalled Aeacides (who until then had been campaigning with his old ally Polyperchon in the Peloponnese). Cassander immediately sent an army against him under his brother, Philip. 
Philip, who was poised to invade Aetolia, marched his army into Acarnania to prevent Aeacides from linking up with the Aetolians. The Epirote army is interceped and a bloody battle is fought, the Macedonians are victorious; killing many Epirotes and capturing 50 leading supporters of Aeacides, who are sent Macedon as prisoners. Aeacides, with the remnant of his forces, managed to join the Aetolians. Eventually, Philip caught up with Aeacides and the Aetolians at Oeniadae and defeated them in battle. Aeacides, who was wounded in the battle, died a few days later.

Notes and references
Sources
This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Smith, William, ed. (1870). "Aeacides". Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology.

External links
The Ancient Library - Aeacides