3725
Agathoclea
Agathoclea Theotropus (Ancient Greek: Ἀγαθόκλεια Θεότροπος, romanized: [Agathokleia](3725) Theotropos; the epithet possibly means the Goddess-like) was an Indo-Greek queen married to Menander I, who ruled in parts of northern India in the 2nd-century BC as regent for her son Strato I. Born in Bactria, likely to a noble family (probably royal) with some authors such as Tarn alleging she was a daughter of Eucratides, however this is uncertain and Tarn is often criticised by modern authors for casually creating dynastic relationships. Nonetheless, Agathoclea would become one of the first woman ruler in the Hellenistic world, and she seems to have been relatively significant due to her large presence on the coins of Strato I.

Date and genealogy
The traditional view, introduced by Tarn and defended as late as 1998 by Bopearachchi, is that [Agathokleia](3725) was the widow of Menander I. She may also have been the daughter of Eucratides. In the civil wars after Menander's death, the Indo-Greek empire was divided, with [Agathokleia](3725) and her young son Strato maintaining themselves in the eastern territories of Gandhara and Punjab.

The modern view, embraced by R. C. Senior and probably more solid since it is founded on numismatical analyses, suggests that [Agathokleia](3725) was a later queen, perhaps ruling from 110 BC–100 BC or slightly later. In this case, Agathoclea was likely the widow of another king, possibly Nicias or Theophilus. In either case, [Agathokleia](3725) was among the first women to rule a Hellenistic Kingdom.
Some of her subjects may have been reluctant to accept an infant king with a queen regent: unlike the Seleucid and Ptolemaic Kingdoms, almost all Indo-Greek rulers were depicted as grown men. This was probably because the kings were required to command armies, as can be seen on their coins where they are often depicted with helmets and spears. [Agathokleia](3725) seems to have associated herself with [Athena](598), the goddess of war. [Athena](598) was also the dynastic deity of the family of Menander, and [Agathokleia](3725)'s prominent position suggests that she was herself the daughter of a king, though she was probably too late to have been a daughter of the Bactrian king Agathocles.

Coinage
The coins of [Agathokleia](3725) and Strato were all bilingual, and Agathoclea's name appears more often in the Greek legend than in the Indian.
(See Strato I for details of legends.)
Most of Agathoclea's coins were struck jointly with her son Strato, though on their first issues, he is not featured on the portrait.
Silver: Bust of Agathoclea/walking king
Bust of Strato and Agathoclea conjoined/[Athena](598) Alcidemus
Bronzes: Bust of either helmeted [Athena](598) or Agathoclea as a personification of this goddess/sitting Heracles
The later king Heliocles II overstruck some of Agathoclea's coins.

See also
Greco-Buddhism
Indo-Scythians

References
Sources
W. W. Tarn. The Greeks in Bactria and India. Third Edition. Cambridge: University Press, 1966.

External links
Main coins of [Agathokleia](3725)
Web page of [Agathokleia](3725)'s coins