391
Cairn Terrier
The Cairn Terrier is a terrier breed originating in the Scottish Highlands and recognised as one of Scotland's earliest working dogs.
The name "Cairn Terrier" was a compromise suggestion when the breed was brought to official shows in the United Kingdom in 1909, initially under the name "Short-haired Skye terrier". This name was not accepted by the Kennel Club when faced with opposition from breeders of the Skye Terrier. The alternative name Cairn Terrier was adopted.

History
Cairn terriers originated in the Scottish Highlands and the Isle of Skye. Prior to 1873, terriers in Scotland were collectively referred to as 'Scottish Terriers'. In the early days of the breed's establishment, the name  'short haired Skye Terrier' was used. After concerns raised by the Skye Terrier Club, the name 'Cairn Terrier' was given to the breed instead. The name 'Cairn Terrier' comes from Cairn, where the terriers often flushed out vermin.
The Kennel Club of the United Kingdom gave the Cairn Terrier a separate register in 1912; the first year of recognition, 134 were registered, and the breed was given Championship status.
Terry was a Cairn Terrier actor who played Toto in the Wizard of Oz.

Description
The Cairn Terrier has a harsh, weather-resistant outer coat that can be black, cream, wheaten, red, sandy, gray, or brindled. Pure black, black and tan, and white are not permitted by many kennel clubs. While registration of white Cairns was once permitted, after 1917, the American Kennel Club required them to be registered as West Highland White Terriers. A notable characteristic of Cairns is that brindled Cairns frequently change colour throughout their lifetimes. It is not uncommon for a brindled Cairn to become progressively more black or silver as it ages. The Cairn is double-coated, with a soft, dense undercoat and a harsh outer coat. A well-groomed Cairn has a rough-and-ready appearance, free of artifice. The Cairn Terrier was registered into the American Kennel Club in 1903.

Cairn Terriers tend to look similar to Norwich Terriers, but with some differences (for example the shaggy fur). The outer layer of fur is shaggy, but they have a soft, downy undercoat. The ideal weight is 4.5-7.3 kg (10-16 lb), and the height 9–13 in (23–33 cm).

Health
A 2015 French study found a life expectancy of 13.42 years. A 2024 UK study found a life expectancy of 14 years for the breed compared to an average of 12.7 for purebreeds and 12 for crossbreeds.
Some of the more common hereditary health problems found in the Cairn are:

Bronchoesophageal fistula
Cataracts
Corneal dystrophy
Craniomandibular osteopathy (lion jaw)
Diabetes mellitus
Entropion
Hip dysplasia
Hypothyroidism
Krabbe disease (globoid cell leukodystrophy)
Legg–Calvé–Perthes disease
Lens luxation
Luxating patella
Ocular melanosis
Portosystemic shunt
Progressive retinal atrophy
Soft-tissue sarcoma
Von Willebrand disease

The breed is predisposed to atopic dermatitis.


== References ==