3950
1991 Asturian regional election
The 1991 Asturian regional election was held on Sunday, 26 May 1991, to elect the 3rd General Junta of the Principality of [Asturias](3902). All 45 seats in the General Junta were up for election. The election was held simultaneously with regional elections in twelve other autonomous communities and local elections all throughout Spain.
The Democratic and Social Centre (CDS) suffered a significant drop of its vote share, losing 6 out of the 8 seats it had held previous to the 1991 election and around 2/3 of its votes. On the other hand, all three [Spanish Socialist Workers' Party](3937) (PSOE), newly founded People's Party (PP) (successor party to the late People's Alliance) and United Left (IU) won seats. Additionally, the Asturianist Party (PAS) was able to overcome the 3% threshold in the Central District and entered the General Junta with 1 seat.
After the election, Juan Luis Rodríguez-Vigil was elected President of [Asturias](3902), succeeding Pedro de Silva who did not stand for re-election to a third term in office.

Overview
Electoral system
The General Junta of the Principality of [Asturias](3902) was the devolved, unicameral legislature of the autonomous community of [Asturias](3902), having legislative power in regional matters as defined by the Spanish Constitution and the Asturian Statute of Autonomy, as well as the ability to vote confidence in or withdraw it from a regional president.
Voting for the General Junta was on the basis of universal suffrage, which comprised all nationals over 18 years of age, registered in [Asturias](3902) and in full enjoyment of their political rights. The 45 members of the General Junta of the Principality of [Asturias](3902) were elected using the D'Hondt method and a closed list proportional representation, with an electoral threshold of three percent of valid votes—which included blank ballots—being applied in each constituency. Seats were allocated to constituencies, which were established by law as follows:

Central District, comprising the municipalities of Aller, Avilés, Bimenes, Carreño, Caso, Castrillón, Corvera de [Asturias](3902), Gijón, Gozón, Illas, Las Regueras, Langreo, Laviana, Lena, Llanera, Mieres, Morcín, Noreña, Oviedo, Proaza, Quirós, Ribera de Arriba, Riosa, San Martín del Rey Aurelio, Santo Adriano, Sariego, Siero, Sobrescobio and Soto del Barco.
Eastern District, comprising the municipalities of [Amieva](3979), Cabrales, Cabranes, Cangas de Onís, Caravia, Colunga, Llanes, Nava, Onís, Parres, Peñamellera Alta, Peñamellera Baja, Piloña, Ponga, Ribadedeva, Ribadesella and Villaviciosa.
Western District, comprising the municipalities of [Allande](3975), Belmonte de Miranda, Boal, Candamo, Cangas del Narcea, Castropol, Coaña, Cudillero, Degaña, El Franco, Grado, Grandas de Salime, Ibias, Illano, Muros de Nalón, Navia, Pesoz, Pravia, Salas, San Martín de Oscos, Santa Eulalia de Oscos, San Tirso de Abres, Somiedo, Tapia de Casariego, Taramundi, Teverga, Tineo, Valdés, Vegadeo, Villanueva de Oscos, Villayón and Yernes y Tameza.
Each constituency was allocated an initial minimum of two seats, with the remaining 39 being distributed in proportion to their populations.
In smaller constituencies, the use of the electoral method resulted in an effective threshold based on the district magnitude and the distribution of votes among candidacies.
The electoral law allowed for parties and federations registered in the interior ministry, coalitions and groupings of electors to present lists of candidates. Parties and federations intending to form a coalition ahead of an election were required to inform the relevant Electoral Commission within ten days of the election call, whereas groupings of electors needed to secure the signature of at least one percent of the electorate in the constituencies for which they sought election, disallowing electors from signing for more than one list of candidates.

Election date
The term of the General Junta of the Principality of [Asturias](3902) expired four years after the date of its previous election. Legal amendments earlier in 1991 established that elections to the General Junta were to be fixed for the fourth Sunday of May every four years. The previous election was held on 10 June 1987, setting the election date for the General Junta on Sunday, 26 May 1991.
The General Junta could not be dissolved before the date of expiry of parliament except in the event of an investiture process failing to elect a regional president within a two-month period from the first ballot. In such a case, the General Junta was to be automatically dissolved and a snap election called, with elected deputies merely serving out what remained of their four-year terms.

Opinion polls
The table below lists voting intention estimates in reverse chronological order, showing the most recent first and using the dates when the survey fieldwork was done, as opposed to the date of publication. Where the fieldwork dates are unknown, the date of publication is given instead. The highest percentage figure in each polling survey is displayed with its background shaded in the leading party's colour. If a tie ensues, this is applied to the figures with the highest percentages. The "Lead" column on the right shows the percentage-point difference between the parties with the highest percentages in a poll. When available, seat projections determined by the polling organisations are displayed below (or in place of) the percentages in a smaller font; 23 seats were required for an absolute majority in the General Junta of the Principality of [Asturias](3902).

Results
Overall
Distribution by constituency
Aftermath
Government formation
1993 investiture
Notes
References
Opinion poll sources

Other