4214
Alentejan Portuguese
Alentejan Portuguese is a dialect of Portuguese spoken in the Portuguese region of [Alentejo](2603). It is also spoken, with its own subdialect, in the disputed municipalities of Olivença and Táliga. In this area, the language is currently endangered.

Characteristics
Presence of the article before the possessive pronoun, as in Ladino
The regular use of the gerund in the present tense.
A shift of ou to oi: oitro for outro
Paragoge with i added to the end of verbs in the infinitive of verbs: fazeri for fazer
The diphthong ei is replaced by e: galinhero for galinheiro

Present situation in Olivença and Táliga
The 2005 report of the Council of Europe's expert group on the implementation of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in Spain asked the Spanish government to furnish information about the situation of Oliventine Portuguese, and for measures for the protection and promotion of that language under the provisions of Article 7 of the charter. However, in the report submitted by Spain in 2006, there are no references to Oliventine Portuguese. 
In the 2008 report issued by the Council of Europe, the following paragraphs were listed: 

48. The Expert Committee has received no information on the use of Portuguese in Extremadura, particularly in Olivença.
49. According to information gathered during the site visit, the Portuguese language (the Oliventina) is traditionally spoken in Olivença and Táliga since the 13th century. However, the information received on the current use of this language is inconclusive, but indicates that Portuguese is taught as a foreign language in the education field.

50. The Expert Committee can not assess the situation of Portuguese in Extremadura, and urges the authorities to clarify this issue in the next cycle of monitoring, particularly in cooperation with the association "Além Guadiana", recently established to promote the Portuguese language.

See also
Oliventine Portuguese

References


== Further reading ==