4216
Algherese dialect
Algherese or Alguerese (autonym: alguerés alɣaˈɾes) is the variety of  Catalan spoken in the city of [Alghero](4217) (L'Alguer in Catalan), in the northwest of Sardinia, Italy.
The dialect has its roots in 1372, when Catalan-speaking colonists were allowed to repopulate [Alghero](4217) and expel the native population, after several revolts. Catalan was replaced as the official language by Spanish, then by Italian in the mid-18th century. Today the language has semi-official recognition alongside Italian.
Studies give an approximate number of 20,000 to 30,000 native speakers of the language worldwide. In communities where Algherese is spoken, Italian and Logudorese Sardinian are often used as well.

History
Algherese is a regional dialect spoken by anywhere from 20,000 to 30,000 individuals, most of whom reside in the town of [Alghero](4217), located in the northwest of Sardinia. The language, though distinct, is initially derived from, and thus considered a variant of, the [Catalan language](4201). The origins of the language can be traced back to 1372, when Catalan invaders repopulated the city of [Alghero](4217) after exiling the indigenous populations in Sardinia. Despite the city's increasing Italianisation, the use of this Catalan dialect remained widespread until at least the 1970s.

Present status
As a result of the city's extensive Italianisation, Italian is now the predominant language in [Alghero](4217), being estimated by a 2004 survey to be first language of close to 60% of those surveyed. The use of the dialect in schools and media, to name a few, remains sparse. Teaching of the dialect in school is also rare. However, in an attempt to reverse the trend, the Regional Council of Sardinia officially recognised "Algherese Catalan" as a separate language in 1997, in order to promote its use and circulation. According to the 2004 survey, Algherese was used by approximately 14% of the population for daily interactions. The dialect is mostly a local language, often used to supplement Italian and/or Sardinian in relatively small circles.
The following figures were obtained from the Enquesta d'usos lingüístics a l'Alguer ("Survey of linguistic usage in [Alghero](4217)", EULAL) of 2004 and the Els usos lingüístics a l'Alguer of 2015 (EULA 2015), both of which were studies conducted in the town of [Alghero](4217) about the general use of Algherese in several media.

Official recognition
In 1999, Catalan and Sardinian were among the twelve minority languages officially recognised as Italy's "historical linguistic minorities" by the Italian State under Law No. 482/1999. Prior to this, the Regional Council of Sardinia had passed the Regional Law No. 26 of 15 October 1997 which, aside from promoting the equality in dignity of the Sardinian language with the Italian language throughout the island, provided that the other languages of smaller scope be afforded the same treatment as the aforementioned languages, among which Catalan is cited, in the city of [Alghero](4217). The city council, for its part, promulgated its protection and standardisation in its city statute.

Phonology
Vowels

Notes:
The close-mid and mid-close vowels /ɛ, e/ and /ɔ, o/ merge into mid vowels (e̞ and o̞, here transcribed without diacritics) in Modern Alguerese.
Coalescing of unstressed vowels /a/, (/ɛ/) and /e/ to ä ~ ɐ (transcribed as /a/) unlike the rest of Eastern Catalan, which uses ə or even ɐ (transcribed as /ə/): aura ('aura') ˈawɾə (Eastern Standard), ˈawɾa (Algherese).
Unstressed /o/ (/ɔ, o/) reduces to u like most Eastern Catalan dialects.
Consonants

Notes:
Algherese preserves /v/ as a distinct phoneme from /b/, like Balearic and most of Valencian: viu ('he/she lives') viw (Algherese).
Mutation of intervocalic /d/ and /l/ to ɾ: Barceloneta bəɾsəluˈnɛtə (Eastern Standard), balsaɾuˈneta (Algherese) 'Barcelonette'; and vila ('town') and vida ('life') are homophones in Algherese ˈviɾa.
Mutation of syllable final /r/ (or ɾ) to lateral l, and the possible resulting group /r/ + consonant is further simplified to l: forn ˈfoɾn (Eastern Standard), ˈfol (Algherese) 'oven'.
Depalatalisation of syllable final sonorants: lateral /ʎ/ to l, nasal /ɲ/ to n: ball ˈbaʎ (Eastern Standard), ˈbal (Algherese) 'dance'; any ˈaɲ (Eastern Standard), ˈan (Algherese) 'year'.

Morphology
The simple past is replaced by the present perfect (present of haver "to have" + past participle), possibly by Italian influence.
The imperfect past preserves etymological -v- in all conjugations: 1st -ava, 2nd -iva, 3rd -iva  unlike modern Eastern and Western Standard Catalan, which use 1st -ava, 2nd -ia, 3rd -ia, a feature shared with the Ribagorçan dialect.
Large-scale lexical borrowing and calques from Sardinian, Spanish and Italian: nearly half of the vocabulary is not from Catalan.

Differences from Standard Catalan
The Algherese variant is Eastern Catalan, but it has many differences from Central Catalan, with some of the most obvious ones as follows:

Vocabulary
The following abbreviations are used: m. (masculine), f. (feminine), pl. (plural), f. pl. (feminine plural), inf. (informal), f. (formal).
The following phrases were gathered from a Catalan translation set, but the common phrases in Algherese are similar:

Literature
The Premi Rafael Sari, organised by the Obra Cultural de l'Alguer, is a series of prizes awarded in September each year to the best literary works of poetry and prose written in Algherese Catalan.
Notable poets include Rafael Sari, Pasquale Scanu and Maria Chessa Lai. There is also a long tradition of writing and performing songs in Algherese Catalan and the Premi Pino Piras is awarded for new songs written in the language. Notable singer-songwriters include Pino Piras and Franca Masu.
In 2015 Carla Valentino published an Algherese translation of Antoine de Saint-Exupéry's The Little Prince.

See also
Catalan dialects and varieties
Balearic
Valencian
Central Catalan
Northern Catalan

Notes
References
Sources
External links
Diccionari d'alguerés
Associació per a la Salvaguarda del Patrimoni Historico-cultural de l'Alguer
Interactive Atlas of Romance Intonation, Catalan Alguerese
Italy's Last Bastion of Catalan Languages Struggles to Keep It Alive, New York Times, 21 November 2016.