4228
Anti-Catalan sentiment
Anti-Catalan sentiment  (Catalan: anticatalanisme, IPA: ˌantikətələˈnizmə) is the collective name given to various  trends in Spain, France and Italy that expresses disdain, discrimination, or hatred for [Catalonia](2549), to [Catalans](2548), Catalan culture, Catalan nationalism, [Catalan language](4201) or its history. It can also be referred to as Anti-Catalanism or Catalanophobia.

Description
In a historical context, anti-Catalanism expresses itself as a hostile attitude towards the [Catalan language](4201), people, traditions or anything identified with [Catalonia](2549). In a political context it may express itself as the reaction to a perceived intrusion of Catalan political nationalism into the area. In its most extreme circumstances, this may also be referred as Catalanophobia, though it is not a phobia per se. Several political movements, known for organising boycotts of products from [Catalonia](2549), are also actively identified with anti-Catalanism. Anti-Catalan sentiment often expresses the denial of the existence, in any degree or form, of Catalan national identity, whether in the past or in the present.
Sometimes, [Catalans](2548) abroad or within [Catalonia](2549) have experienced verbal harassment or denial of provision of goods and services, often in reaction to the use of [Catalan language](4201).

History
Italy in the Middle Ages
Historian Antoni Simon states that between the 12th and 15th centuries, the [Crown of Aragon](2563)'s military expansion into Sicily, Sardinia and southern Italy and the entry of Catalan merchants into these markets generated a deep sense of hostility against the [Catalans](2548) - often identified as Spaniards. Reflections can be found in the literary works of Dante Alighieri, Giovanni Boccaccio, Francesco Petrarca, Luigi Alamanni, Pietro Aretino or Serafino Aquilano. He states that it was an anti-Catalan sentiment that was more cultural-linguistic than political-territorial, due to the protests over the election of Alfonso de Borja in 1455 as Pope Calixtus III for being "barbaric and Catalan".

Spain in the early modern period
The dynastic union of the Crown of Castile with the [Crown of Aragon](2563) took place through the Catholic Monarchs. The Castilian hegemony in the newly established Monarchy of Spain left the peripheral realms under a royal government located in Madrid since 1561, a government composed of people mainly of Castilian origin.
At the beginning of the 16th century, King Ferdinand II of Aragon was called, in a derogatory manner, "viejo catalanote" ("old Catalan fool") by the Castilian nobility, being expelled from Castile and seen as an intruder after the death of Queen Isabella I of Castile.
In accordance with the Nueva Planta decree of 1716 promulgated by Philip V after the War of the Spanish Succession (1701-1714), most of the public legislation and institutions of the Principality of [Catalonia](2549) was abolished, leading to the marginalization of the [Catalan language](4201) and culture, favoring instead the Spanish language. The administrative use of the [Catalan language](4201) was replaced it with Spanish. While theoretically the replacement solely affected the Royal Audience, the king provided with secret instructions to the royal officers in Catalan territory: they "will take the utmost care to introduce the Castilian language, for which purpose he will give the most temperate and disguised measures so that the effect is achieved, without the care being noticed."

The Nueva Planta decrees were royal measures aimed at suppressing those who were defeated during the Succession War, and it initiated the creation of a French-style Spanish centralized state in accordance with the laws of Castile, and for the first time founded the Kingdom of Spain. This centralization took quite some time during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, reaching maximum levels during the dictatorship of Franco and the White Terror.

The 19th and 20th centuries
In the 19th century, the Spanish economy was largely dominated by agricultural production such as cereals from Castile, intended for sale on European markets. In these regions, the bourgeoisie and the landowners, supported by the central state, was favorable to free trade policy. On the contrary, the Catalan bourgeoisie was largely industrial and a producer of textiles, therefore interested in significant customs duties. This fight mobilized most of Catalan society. This struggle creates “in the rest of Spain the image of a selfish and interested [Catalonia](2549), determined to achieve its ends even at the expense of any Spanish interest”.

Persecution of Catalan in Francoist Spain
The dictatorship of Francisco Franco (1939-1975), not only saw the suppression of democratic freedoms, but also the [Catalan language](4201) and culture were crushed at an unprecedented level, being excluded from the education system and relegated to the family sphere. Castillian (Spanish) became the only language of education, administration, business and the media. During the [Spanish Civil War](3934) period, the retoric use of Catalanophobia by the Rebel faction led directly to menaces and outbreaks of ethnic conflict of genocidal nature, as Paul Preston points out in "The Spanish Holocaust":
"In the days following the occupation of Lleida (...) republican prisoners identified as [Catalans](2548) were executed without trial. Whoever they heard speaking in Catalan was very likely to end up arrested. The arbitrary brutality of the anti-Catalan repression reached such a point that Franco himself had to issue an order stipulating that mistakes that could later be regretted should be avoided”..."There are examples of the murder of peasants for no other apparent reason than that of speaking Catalan"

Scholars Rafael Aracil, Joan Oliver and Antoni Segura considered that until 1951, the persecution of [Catalan language](4201) was "total". In some places students had to denounce fellow students who spoke Catalan. During this period, The [Catalan language](4201) was also prohibited on tombstones. Between 1939 and 1943 book printing in Catalan virtually disappeared.
With the defeat of Nazi Germany in 1945, some of the harsh mesures began to be lifted and, while Spanish language remained the sole promoted one, limited number of Catalan literature began to be tolerated. However, works aimed at young people were restricted to limit the learning of the written language. Among these authors were those who returned from exile in 1942–1943. Their works include a Catalan translation of the Odyssey (1948) by Carles Riba, and research conducted by teacher Alexandre Galí with Història de les Institucions 1900-1936 (History of Institutions), which even today are reference works.
In 1968, in a discussion about cultural activity in [Catalan language](4201), Catalan businessman J.B. Cendrós tried to get the then Franco's Minister Manuel Fraga Iribarne to lift the order to withdraw from circulation the first edition of the "Illustrated History of [Catalonia](2549)". Fraga ended up glorifying the various times that Spain had militarily attacked [Catalonia](2549) and that they were ready to do it again.
Later on, opening of the regime allowed a small change in the marginalization of the language, such as the broadcast in 1964 of the first Catalan television program on TVE (Teatre català), the Nova Cançó (New Song) (1961) movement, though there were limits such as the ban on Joan Manuel Serrat singing in Catalan at the Eurovision Song Contest in 1968.

After Spanish transition to democracy
In 1992 the police operation known as "Operation Garzón" saw the arrest of 45 Catalan pro-independence activists and politicians on the eve of the Summer Olympics held in Barcelona, under the accusation to be members of the armed Catalan pro-independence organisation Terra Lliure without real proof. 25 of the arrested were kept in solitary confinement. They denounced torture at the hands of the Spanish police and threats of violence and rape to them and their families, as well as constant Anti-Catalan and Catalanophobic insults.
The regrowth of anti-Catalan sentiment in Spain during the first decade of the 21st century was marked, among other reasons, by the reform of the Statute of Autonomy of [Catalonia](2549) and the demands from Catalan society for the return of the "Salamanca Papers", a series of documents massively confiscated from individuals and organizations in [Catalonia](2549) during the [Spanish Civil War](3934) by Franco's army in order to enact a harsh repression. 
In 2006 the Spanish conservative People's Party (PP) launched an advertising campaign against "the pact of the Catalan Statute and the grievances for Andalusia". However, 14 articles from the Statute of Autonomy of [Catalonia](2549) that the PP deemed as unconstitutionals had an identical wording in the Statute of Autonomy of Andalusia, which was fully supported by the party chaired by Mariano Rajoy.
On the other hand, in the autonomous community of Valencia, anti-Catalanism has been part of the strategy of the political right since the democratic transition, being instrumental the Valencian right-wing regionalist movement known as "[Blaverism](4279)". On 11 April 1993, the pro-Catalan independence and anti-fascist Valencian activist Guillem Agulló was assassinated by a group of neo-nazis and Spanish nationalists in Montanejos. Family members and left-wing and pro-independence organizations denounced that the motive for the crime had been political, since the young people who intervened in the murder were known for their Spanish and fascist ideology and that they also knew of the anti-fascist ideology of Agulló.
In the 2010s, some organizations and fake news blogs such as Dolça Catalunya, closely linked to the Spanish far-right and the ultra-Catholicism, have maintained and become a vehicle of anti-Catalanism, pseudohistory and language secessionism.
The language and culture of a population of around 10 million Catalan-Valencian speakers is virtually non-existent in the Spanish media. At the same time, the media and social networks are a vehicle for the dissemination of a subtle or explicit Catalanophobia  accompanying banal Spanish nationalism.
The incorporation of varying degrees of Catalanophobia into the banal nationalism of large sections of Spanish society is sublimated in cries of attack such as "a por ellos, oé" by the population but also by the Spanish law enforcement forces, during the police suppression of the [2017 Catalan independence referendum](2503).

Statistics
The reality of those feelings has been expressed in studies carried out by different opinion institutes. Constantly, [Catalans](2548) appeared as the least valued people in Spain; after them would generally be the Basques. In 2020, the Centre d'Estudis d'Opinió carried out a survey asking about the likes and dislikes of Spaniards. According to the results of the report, [Catalonia](2549) is the autonomous community that, by far, generate the least sympathy from the rest.

Spanish historical revisionism
Anti-Catalanism can be found in the debates concerning the history of [Catalonia](2549) and its relationship with the history of Spain, generally in non-academic spaces, also being part of banal nationalism. Mostly based on the remaining clichés from Spanish romantic historiography of Castilian basis, promoted and later consolidated by the Francoist dictatorship, Spanish pseudo-historical arguments towards [Catalonia](2549) seek to minimize or deny any role, external visibility or political organization specific to the [Catalan people](3362) in the past. 
It became particularly widespread during the first decades of the 21st century due to the increasing demands for Catalan self-determination, being often used as a tool to deny any possible historical legitimization of Catalan demands. The dissemination of pseudo-historical arguments was facilitated by media and individuals opposed to [Catalonia](2549)'s self-determination and by those linked to the political right, as well as the diffusion by social networks.
Some of the recurrent topics are:

Confusion between the concepts of [Crown of Aragon](2563) and one of its components, the Kingdom of Aragon, thus denying its composite monarchy structure.
Denial or relativization the existence of the Principality of [Catalonia](2549), under the assumption that the term was just a geographic expression void of any political significance, while claiming that the Catalan counties were an integral part of the Kingdom of Aragon.
Attribution to [Catalonia](2549)'s institutions and leadership of the early modern age an outdated and oligarchic political behaviour.
Accusations against Catalan president Lluís Companys (1933-1940) of being the direct responsible for the execution of individuals opposed to the Republican faction during the [Spanish Civil War](3934) in [Catalonia](2549).

See also
Black legend
Lerrouxism
Polaco (slur)
State nation
Vergonha

References
Bibliography
Aracil Martí, Rafael; Oliver i Puigdomènech, Joan; Segura i Mas, Antoni (1998). El mundo actual. De la Segunda Guerra Mundial a nuestros días (in Spanish). Publicacions i Edicions de la Universitat de Barcelona. ISBN 978-8483380062.
Solé i Sabaté, Josep Maria; Villarroya i Font, Joan (1993). Cronologia de la repressió de la llengua i la cultura catalanes (1936-1975) (in Catalan). Curial. ISBN 9788472569577.
Baydal, Vicent; Palomo, Cristian (2020). Pseudohistòria contra Catalunya. De l'espanyolisme a la Nova Història. Vic: Ed. Eumo. ISBN 978-84-9766-689-3.