4273
Bergamasque dialect
The Bergamasque dialect  is the western variant of the Eastern Lombard group of the Lombard language. It is mainly spoken in the province of Bergamo and in the area around Crema, in central Lombardy.
Bergamasque has official status in the province of Bergamo, according to the Regional Law 25/2016.

Classification
Bergamasque is a Romance language and belongs to the Gallo-Italic branch. Its position on the language family is genetically closer to Occitan, Catalan, French, etc. than to Italian.

Geographic distribution
Bergamasque is primarily spoken in the province of Bergamo and in the area around Crema, in central Lombardy.
Bergamasque is generally mutually intelligible for speakers of Eastern Lombard's variants  of neighbouring areas (i.e. from Brescia) but this is not always true for distant peripheric areas, especially in alpine valleys. Differences include either lexical, grammatical and phonetic aspects. Bergamasque is often referred to as a dialect of the Italian language; this is not correct, as Bergamasque and Italian are not mutually intelligible.
Following the migrations of the 19th and 20th centuries, the Bergamo dialect was transplanted and is spoken in various communities of southern Brazil, for example in the municipality of Botuverá.

Speakers
Monolingual Bergamasque speakers are now virtually non-existent. All Lombard speakers also speak Italian, and their command of each of the two languages varies according to their geographical position as well as their socio-economic situation, the most reliable predictor being the speakers' age.

Samples of literary works in Bergamasque
... hec mulier id est la fomna et dicitur mulier, ... hoc ignifer id est ol bernaz et dicitur ignifer ... E fì senorzat da Peter e incalzat da Martì, ... cola pena mal temprata no po fì bona letra.  
A nomo sia de Crist ol dì presentDi des comandament alegramentI qua de de pader onnipotentA morsis per salvar la zent.E chi i des comandament observaràin vita eterna cum Xristo andarà ...
...Se bé cognosse, chesto nost parlàbergamasch no s'convè a lodà la zét,gnè da fà pians, perché chi lès o sètal gà fà piotost gni vòia d'grignà...
I armi, i fomni, i soldacc, quand che in amôrI andava d' Marz, af voi cuntà in sti vers,Che fü in dol tèp che con tancc furôrAl vign de za dol mar i Mor Pervers,Condücc dal re Gramant, so car signôr,Che voliva più Franza e l'universE destrüz sech Re Carlo e i PaladìPer vendicà sò Pader Sarasì.
Che per spiegass bé e spert, sciassegh e stagna tate lengue ch'è montade in scagn,al Fiorentì, al Fransesla nost lagh dà neuf per andà ai dès....Mi per efett de ver amour, de stima,Lavori e pensi in primaA i mè compatriogg a i mè terèr;E dopo, se 'l men vansa, a i forestèr.
Al vé vià quacc diàvoi chi gh'è maiAl segn de quel teribel orchesù.De pura 'l sa sgörlè i mür infernai.E serè fò Proserpina i balcù;I è röse e fiur, borasche e temporai,Tempeste e sömelèc, saete e tru,E a par de quel tremàs là zo de sot,L'è cöcagna balurda 'l teremòt.

Another example
The Lord's Prayer
English- 
Our Father who art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread,
and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass against us, and lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
Italian-
Padre nostro, che sei nei cieli, sia santificato il tuo nome, venga il tuo regno, sia fatta la tua volontà, come in cielo così in terra. Dacci oggi il nostro pane quotidiano, e rimetti a noi i nostri debiti come noi li rimettiamo ai nostri debitori, e non ci indurre in tentazione, ma liberaci dal male. Amen.
Bergamasque-
Pader nòst che te sé in cél a'l sìes santificàt ol tò nòm, a'l végne 'l tò régn, la sìes facia la tò olontà
cóme in cél, isé 'n tèra. Daga 'ncö ol nòst pà de töcc i dé e pàghega i nòscc débecc cóme nóter m' ghi paga ai nòscc debitùr faga mìa börlà in tentassiù, ma sàlvega del mal. Amen.

Bibliography
Bortolo Belotti, Storia di Bergamo e dei bergamaschi.
Carmelo Francia, Emanuele Gambarini, Dizionario italiano-bergamasco, Bergamo, Grafital, 2001.
Carmelo Francia, Emanuele Gambarini, Dizionario bergamasco-italiano, Bergamo, Grafital, 2004.
Umberto Zanetti, La grammatica bergamasca, Bergamo, Sestante, 2004. ISBN 88-87445-59-1.
Paganessi, Giulia (2017). Brazilian Bergamasch: an Italian language spoken in Botuverá (Santa Catarina, Brazil) (MA). Leiden University. hdl:1887/52581.

References
External links
Orbilat - An interesting site more for western lombard, but the map of the distribution of the two main varieties is noteworthy.
Italian/Bergamasque Dictionary - Carmelo Francia, Emanuele Gambarini - Ducato di piazza Pontida
Ducato di piazza Pontida (folkloristical and linguistic association)
Difficult phrases in Bergamasque (in Italian)
A collection of comedies in Bergamasque
a Casiratese-Italian vocabulary, a dictionary for the Bergamasque variety of Casirate d'Adda village, in Italian.