4376
Caribbean Community
The [Caribbean Community](4376) (CARICOM or CC) is an intergovernmental organisation that is a political and economic union of 15 member states (14 nation-states and one dependency) and five associated members throughout the [Americas](3978), The Caribbean and Atlantic Ocean. It has the primary objective to promote economic integration and cooperation among its members, ensure that the benefits of integration are equitably shared, and coordinate foreign policy. The organisation was established in 1973, by its four founding members signing the Treaty of Chaguaramas. Its primary activities involve:

Coordinating economic policies and development planning.
Devising and instituting special projects for the less-developed countries within its jurisdiction.
Operating as a regional single market for many of its members ([Caricom](4378) Single Market).
Handling regional trade disputes.
The secretariat headquarters is in Georgetown, Guyana. CARICOM has been granted the official United Nations General Assembly observer status.
CARICOM was established by the English-speaking countries of the Caribbean and currently includes all the independent Anglophone island countries plus [Belize](4352), Guyana, Montserrat and Suriname, as well as all other British Caribbean territories and Bermuda as associate members. English was its sole working language into the 1990s. The organisation became multilingual with the addition of Dutch and Sranan Tongo-speaking Suriname in 1995 and the French and Haitian Creole-speaking Haiti in 2002. Furthermore, it added Spanish as the fourth official language in 2003. In July 2012, CARICOM announced they considered making French and Dutch official languages. In 2001, the Conference of Heads of Governments signed a revised Treaty of Chaguaramas that cleared the way to transform the idea of a common market CARICOM into the CARICOM Single Market and Economy (CSME). Part of the revised treaty establishes and implements the Caribbean Court of Justice.

History
CARICOM, originally The [Caribbean Community](4376) and Common Market, was established by the Treaty of Chaguaramas which took effect on 1 August 1973. Founding states were [Barbados](3181), Jamaica, Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago.
The [Caribbean Community](4376) superseded the 1965–1972 Caribbean Free Trade Association (CARIFTA) organised to provide a continued economic linkage between the English-speaking countries of the Caribbean after the dissolution of the West Indies Federation, which lasted from 3 January 1958 to 31 May 1962.
A revised Treaty of Chaguaramas established The [Caribbean Community](4376) including the CARICOM Single Market and Economy (CSME) and was signed by the CARICOM Heads of Government of the [Caribbean Community](4376) on 5 July 2001 at their Twenty-Second Meeting of the Conference in Nassau, The Bahamas. The revised treaty cleared the way to transform the idea of a common market CARICOM into the Caribbean (CARICOM) Single Market and Economy.
Haiti's membership in CARICOM remained effectively suspended from 29 February 2004 through early June 2006 following the 2004 Haitian coup d'état and the removal of Jean-Bertrand Aristide from the presidency. CARICOM announced that no democratically elected government in CARICOM should have its leader deposed. The fourteen other heads of government sought to have Aristide fly from Africa to Jamaica and share his account of events with them, which infuriated the interim Haitian prime minister, Gérard Latortue, who announced he would take steps to take Haiti out of CARICOM. CARICOM thus voted on suspending the participation of Haitian officials from the councils of CARICOM. Following the presidential election of René Préval, Haitian officials were readmitted and Préval himself gave the opening address at the CARICOM Council of Ministers meeting in July.
Since 2013 the CARICOM-bloc and with the Dominican Republic have been tied to the [European Union](1200) via an Economic Partnership Agreements signed in 2008 known as CARIFORUM. The treaty grants all members of the [European Union](1200) and CARIFORUM equal rights in terms of trade and investment. Under Article 234 of the agreement, the European Court of Justice handles dispute resolution between CARIFORUM and [European Union](1200) states.

Membership
As of 2024 CARICOM has 15 full members, six associate members and eight observers. The associated members are five British Overseas Territories and one constituent county of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. It is currently not established what the role of the associate members will be. The observers are states which engage in at least one of CARICOM's technical committees.

Relationship with Cuba
In 2017, the Republic of Cuba and CARICOM signed the "CARICOM-Cuba Trade and Economic Cooperation Agreement" to facilitate closer trade ties. In December 2022, President of Cuba Miguel Díaz-Canel met in Bridgetown, [Barbados](3181) with the Heads of State and Government of CARICOM. On the occasion of the 8th CARICOM-Cuba Summit to commemorate the 50th Anniversary of establishing diplomatic relations with the independent States of CARICOM and Cuba and the 20th Anniversary of CARICOM-Cuba Day. Cuba also accepted CARICOM's offer to deepen bilateral cooperation and to join robust discussions in the bloc's regional 'Joint Ministerial Taskforce on Food production and Security'.

Organizational structure
The following is the overall structure of [Caribbean Community](4376) (CARICOM).
Under Article 4 CARICOM breaks its 15 member states into two groups: Less Developed Countries (LDCs) and More Developed Countries (MDCs).
The countries of CARICOM which are designated as Less Developed Countries (LDCs) are as follows:

Antigua and Barbuda
[Belize](4352)
Commonwealth of Dominica
Grenada
Republic of Haiti
Montserrat
Federation of St. Kitts and Nevis
St Lucia
St Vincent and the Grenadines
The countries of CARICOM which are designated as More Developed Countries (MDCs) are:

Commonwealth of The Bahamas
[Barbados](3181)
Co-operative Republic of Guyana
Jamaica
Republic of Suriname
Republic of Trinidad and Tobago

Chairmanship
The post of Chairman (Head of CARICOM) is held in rotation by the regional Heads of Government of CARICOM's 15 member states. These include Antigua and Barbuda, [Belize](4352), Dominica, Grenada, Haiti, Montserrat, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, The Bahamas, [Barbados](3181), Guyana, Jamaica, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago.

Heads of government
CARICOM contains a quasi-Cabinet of the individual Heads of Government. These heads are given specialised portfolios of responsibility for regional development and integration.

Secretariat
The Secretariat of the [Caribbean Community](4376) is the Chief Administrative Organ for CARICOM. The Secretary-General of the [Caribbean Community](4376) is the chief executive and handles foreign and community relations. Five years is the term of office of the Secretary-General, which may be renewed. The Deputy Secretary-General of the [Caribbean Community](4376) handles human and Social Development. The General Counsel of the [Caribbean Community](4376) handles trade and economic integration.
The goal statement of the CARICOM Secretariat is: "To contribute, in support of Member States, to the improvement of the quality of life of the People of the Community and the development of an innovative and productive society in partnership with institutions and groups working towards attaining a people-centred, sustainable and internationally competitive Community."

Organs and bodies
Community Council
The Community Council comprises ministers responsible for community affairs and any other Minister designated by the member states at their discretion. It is one of the community's principal organs; the other is the Conference of the Heads of Government. Four other organs and three bodies support it.

Institutions
The following institutions are founded by or affiliated to the [Caricom](4378):

[Caricom](4378) Institutions
Functional cooperation
Associate
Administration and staff
Cancelled
The following institutions have been cancelled or merged into other ones:

Symbols
Standard
The flag of the [Caribbean Community](4376) was chosen and approved in November 1983 at the Conference of Heads of Government Meeting in Port of Spain, Trinidad. The original design by the firm of WINART Studies in Georgetown, Guyana was substantially modified at the July 1983 Meeting of the Conference of Heads of Government. The flag was first flown on 4 July 1984 in Nassau, The Bahamas at the fifth Meeting of the Conference of Heads of Government.
The flag features a blue background, but the upper part is a light blue representing sky and the lower, a darker blue representing the Caribbean Sea. The yellow circle in the centre represents the sun on which is printed in black the logo of the [Caribbean Community](4376), two interlocking Cs. The two Cs are in the form of broken links in a chain, symbolising both unity and a break with the colonial past. The narrow ring of green around the sun represents the vegetation of the region.

Song
For CARICOM's 40th anniversary, a competition to compose an official song or anthem for CARICOM was launched in April 2013 to promote choosing a song that promoted unity and inspired CARICOM identity and pride. A regional panel of judges comprising independent experts in music was nominated by member states and the CARICOM Secretariat. Three rounds of competition condensed 63 entries to a final three, from which judges chose Celebrating CARICOM by Michele Henderson of Dominica in March 2014. Henderson won a US$10,000 prize. Her song was produced by her husband, Roland Delsol Jr., and arranged by Earlson Matthew. It also featured Michael Ferrol on drums and choral input from the St. Alphonsus Choir. It was re-produced for CARICOM by Carl Beaver Henderson of Trinidad and Tobago.
A second-place entry titled My CARICOM came from Jamaican Adiel Thomas who won US$5,000, and a third-place song titled One CARICOM by Carmella Lawrence of St. Kitts and Nevis, won US$2,500. The other songs from the top-ten finalists (in no particular order) were:

One Region one Caribbean from Anguilla,
One Caribbean Family from Jamaica,
CARICOM’s Light from St. Vincent & the Grenadines,
We Are CARICOM from Dominica,
Together As one from Dominica,
Blessed CARICOM from Jamaica,
Together We Rise from Jamaica.
The first official performance of Celebrating CARICOM by Henderson took place on Tuesday 1 July 2014 at the opening ceremony for the Thirty-Fifth Regional Meeting of the Conference of Heads of Government in Antigua and Barbuda.

Celebration
CARICOM Day
The celebration of CARICOM Day is the selected day some [Caribbean Community](4376) (CARICOM) countries officially recognise the commemorative date of signing of the Treaty of Chaguaramas, the agreement that established CARICOM on 4 July 1973. The Treaty was signed in Chaguaramas, Trinidad & Tobago by then leaders of: [Barbados](3181), Guyana, Jamaica, and Trinidad and Tobago. CARICOM Day is recognised as an official public holiday in Guyana where the secretariat is based, and is observed on the first Monday of July. The government of Antigua and Barbuda has also implemented CARICOM Day as a holiday.
The day features activities that are organised by government entities such as parades, pageants, and campaigns to educate people about CARICOM.

Caribbean Festival of Arts – CARIFESTA
Caribbean Festival of Arts, commonly known as CARIFESTA, is an annual festival for promoting arts of the Caribbean with a different country hosting the event each year. It was started to provide a venue to "depict the life of the people of the Region, their heroes, morals, myths, traditions, beliefs, creativity and ways of expression" by fostering a sense of Caribbean unity, and motivating artists by showing the best of their home country. It began under the auspices of Guyana's then President Forbes Burnham in 1972, who was inspired by other singular arts festivals in the region.

Statistics
Thousands of [Caricom](4378) nationals live within other member states of the Community.
An estimated 30,000 Jamaicans legally reside in other CARICOM member states, mainly in The Bahamas (6,200), Antigua & Barbuda (estimated 12,000), [Barbados](3181) and Trinidad & Tobago). Also, an estimated 150 Jamaicans live and work in Montserrat. A 21 November 2013 estimated put 16,958 Jamaicans residing illegally in Trinidad & Tobago, as according to the records of the Office of the Chief Immigration Officer, their entry certificates would have since expired. By October 2014, the estimated Jamaicans residing illegally in Trinidad and Tobago was 19,000 along with an estimated 7,169 Barbadians and 25,884 Guyanese residing illegally. An estimated 8,000 Trinidadians and Tobagonians live in Jamaica.

[Barbados](3181) hosts a large diaspora population of Guyanese, of whom (in 2005) 5,032 lived there permanently as citizens, permanent residents, immigrants (with immigrant status) and [Caricom](4378) skilled nationals; 3,200 were residing in [Barbados](3181) temporarily under work permits, as students, or with "reside and work" status. A further 2,000–3,000 Guyanese were estimated to be living illegally in [Barbados](3181) at the time. Migration between [Barbados](3181) and Guyana has deep roots, going back over 150 years, with the most intense period of Barbadian migration to then-British Guiana occurring between 1863 and 1886, although as late as the 1920s and 1930s Barbadians were still leaving [Barbados](3181) for British Guiana.
Migration between Guyana and Suriname also goes back a number of years. An estimated 50,000 Guyanese had migrated to Suriname by 1986 In 1987 an estimated 30–40,000 Guyanese were in Suriname. Many Guyanese left Suriname in the 1970s and 1980s, either voluntarily or by expulsion. Citing a national security concern, over 5,000 were expelled in January 1985 alone. In the instability Suriname experienced following independence, both coups and civil war. In 2013, an estimated 11,530 Guyanese had emigrated to Suriname and 4,662 Surinamese to Guyana.

Relationship to other supranational Caribbean organisations
[Association of Caribbean States](4345)
CARICOM was instrumental in the formation of the [Association of Caribbean States](4345) (ACS) on 24 July 1994. The original idea for the Association came from a recommendation of the West Indian Commission, established in 1989 by the CARICOM heads of state and government. The Commission advocated both deepening the integration process (through the CARICOM Single Market and Economy) and complementing it through a separate regional organisation encompassing all states in the Caribbean.
CARICOM accepted the commission's recommendations and opened dialogue with other Caribbean states, the Central American states and the Latin American nations of Colombia, Venezuela and Mexico which border the Caribbean, for consultation on the proposals of the West Indian Commission.
At an October 1993 summit, the heads of state and government of CARICOM and the presidents of the then-Group of Three (Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela) formally decided to create an association grouping all states of the Caribbean basin. A work schedule for its formation was adopted. The aim was to create the association in less than a year, an objective which was achieved with the formal creation of the ACS.

Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
CARICOM was also involved in the formation of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) on 3 December 2010. The idea for CELAC originated at the Rio Group–[Caribbean Community](4376) Unity Summit on 23 February 2010 in Mexico. This act caters to the integration of the [Americas](3978) process, complimenting well-established initiatives of the Organization of American States.

[European Union](1200): Economic Partnership Agreements
Since 2013, the CARICOM-bloc and the Dominican Republic have been tied to the [European Union](1200) via an Economic Partnership Agreements known as CARIFORUM signed in 2008. The treaty grants all members of the [European Union](1200) and CARIFORUM equal rights in terms of trade and investment. Within the agreement under Article 234, the European Court of Justice also carries dispute resolution mechanisms between CARIFORUM and the states of the [European Union](1200).

OHADAC Project
In May 2016, [Caricom](4378)'s court of original jurisdiction, the CCJ, signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the ACP Legal Association based in Guadeloupe recognising and supporting the goals of implementing a harmonised business law framework in the Caribbean through ACP Legal Association's OHADAC Project.
OHADAC is the acronym for the French "Organisation pour l'Harmonisation du Droit des Affaires en les Caraïbes", which translates into English as "Organisation for the Harmonisation of Business Law in the Caribbean". The OHADAC Project takes inspiration from a similar organisation in Africa and aims to enhance economic integration across the entire Caribbean and facilitate increased trade and international investment through unified laws and alternative dispute resolution methods.

Free-trade agreements
List of bilateral free-trade agreements#CARICOM

See also
[Association of Caribbean States](4345)
EU/UK–CARIFORUM
CSME
Caribbean Financial Action Task Force
Caribbean Initiative
Caribbean Agricultural Research and Development Institute (CARDI)
Caribbean Accreditation Authority for Education in Medicine and other Health Professions
Caribbean Knowledge and Learning Network
Community of Latin American and Caribbean States
Commonwealth of Nations
Languages of the Caribbean
List of regional organizations by population
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
North American Union (NAU)
Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States
Organization of American States
Petrocaribe
Projects of the [Caribbean Community](4376)
Small Island Developing States
Union of South American Nations (UNASUR)
West Indies

References
External links

Official website
Official Blog Archived 30 January 2020 at the Wayback Machine CARICOM Today
CARICOM Representation Office in Haiti (CROH)
CARICOM Statistics: Statistical information compiled through the CARICOM Secretariat
Radio CARICOM: the voice of the [Caribbean Community](4376) (Press Release)
[Caricom](4378) Law: Website and online database of the CARICOM Legislative Drafting Facility (CLDF)
[Caricom](4378) Trade Support Programme: Government of Trinidad and Tobago
CARICOM Trade Support Programme Loan Archived 29 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine
Rapid Exchange System for Dangerous Non-food Consumer Goods (CARREX): Front end for Consumer Product Incident Reporting 
How viable is a single Caribbean currency? Part II
How viable is a single Caribbean currency? Part III
The Dominican Republic in [Caricom](4378)? Yes, we can Archived 1 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine
Bureau recommends re-examination of Dominican Republic's proposed membership in CARICOM Archived 1 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine
Guyana Journal (2007–07): Advancing Integration Between [Caricom](4378) and Central America
EDITORIAL: We may just have to dump CARICOM, 4 July 2010, Jamaica Gleaner
Commentary: Gleaner newspaper suggests disbanding CARICOM Archived 1 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine, 5 July 2010, Caribbean Net News
Does [Caricom](4378) have a future? , 6 July 2010, BBC.co.uk
That elusive governance structure, 7 July 2010, BBC.co.uk