4695
Chiac
Chiac (or Chiak, Chi’aq), is a patois of [Acadian French](4203) spoken mostly in southeastern New Brunswick, [Canada](1956). Chiac is frequently characterized and distinguished from other forms of [Acadian French](4203) by its borrowings from English and is thus often mistakenly considered a form of Franglais. 
The word "Chiac" can also sometimes be used to refer to ethnic Acadians of rural southeastern New Brunswick, who are not considered French Canadian historically and ethnically because of their separate and distinctive history. They are considered ethnically as "Chiac-Acadian" or simply "Chiac".

Characteristics
As a major modern variety of Acadian-French, Chiac shares most phonological particularities of the dialect. However, Chiac contains far more English loanwords compared to other [Canadian French](4370) dialects. Many of its words also have roots in the Eastern Algonquian languages, most notably Mi'kmaq. Loanwords generally follow French conjugation patterns; "Ej j'va aller watcher un movie" uses the English-derived loanword "watch" as if it were an "-er" verb. The most common loans are basic lexical features (nouns, adjectives, verb stems), but a few conjunctions and adverbs are borrowed from English ("but, so, anyway").

History
Chiac originated in the community of specific ethnic Acadians, known as "Chiacs, Chiaks or Chi'aq", living on the southeast coast of New Brunswick, specifically near the Shediac Bay area.
While some believe that Chiac dates back as far as the 17th or the 18th centuries, others believe it developed in the 20th century, in reaction to the dominance of English-language media in [Canada](1956), the lack of French-language primary and secondary education, the increased urbanization of Moncton, and contact with the dominant Anglophone community in the area. The origin of the word "Chiac" is not known; some speculate that it is an alteration of "Shediac" or "Es-ed-ei-ik".

Geographic distribution
Chiac is mostly spoken by native speakers of [Acadian French](4203) in the southeastern region of New Brunswick. Its speakers are primarily located in the Westmorland County of southeastern New Brunswick and further north along the coast in adjacent Kent County.
Further north along the coast, [Acadian French](4203) resembling Quebec French is more common as the border with Quebec is approached. To the immediate east, west, and south, fully bilingual speakers of French and English are found, and the regions beyond typically have unilingual Anglophones.

In culture
Acadian writers, poets, and musicians such as Lisa LeBlanc, Radio Radio, Fayo, Cayouche, Les Hay Babies, 1755, Antonine Maillet and many others have produced works in Chiac.
Chiac is also featured in Acadieman, a comedy about "The world's first Acadian Superhero" by Dano Leblanc.

References
Further reading
King, Ruth. "Overview and Evaluation of Acadie's joual," in  Social Lives in Language – Sociolinguistics and multilingual speech communities: Celebrating the Work of Gillian Sankoff edited by Miriam Meyerhoff and Naomi Nagy (2008)  pp 137ff
Chiac: an example of dialect change and language transfer in [Acadian French](4203). National Library of [Canada](1956), 1987.

See also
Acadian Exodus
[Acadian French](4203)
[Caló (Chicano)](4368)
Cultural assimilation
[French language](4601)
Haitian Creole
Louisiana Creole people
Louisiana Creole
Michif
Pidgin
Shediac

External links
The Chiac verb particle construction – A linguistics paper (beginning on page 56 of the pdf document) examining certain features of Chiac grammar.
Sang Mêlé