5054
Asita
Asita or Kaladevala or Kanhasiri was a hermit ascetic depicted in Buddhist sources as having lived in ancient India. He was a teacher and advisor of Suddhodana, a sage and seer, the father of the Buddha, and is best known for having predicted that prince Siddhartha of Kapilavastu would either become a great chakravartin or become a supreme religious leader; Siddhartha was later known as Gautama Buddha.
The name Asita literally means 'not clinging' while Kanhasiri means 'dark splendour'. Asita is described as a tāpasa, a practitioner of asceticism.
In the "Devadatta" chapter of the Lotus Sutra, it is mentioned that in a past life, Shakyamuni was a king who renounced his throne to seek the Law. A seer named Asita approached him and offered to teach him the Sutra of the Lotus of the Wonderful Law. The king served the seer for a thousand years before receiving instruction in the Lotus Sutra. Shakyamuni identifies himself as the king and the seer as Devadatta in this story, saying that Devadatta acted as a "good friend" who led him to enlightenment.³ He predicts that Devadatta will become a Buddha named Heavenly King. Asita also appeared in other texts, where he predicted that Shakyamuni would become a Buddha. Asita was a seer in Kapilavastu, the kingdom of the Shākyas, who foretold that Shakyamuni would achieve supreme wisdom and become a Buddha if he renounced secular life. Sadly, Asita knew he would not live to hear the Buddha's teaching due to his old age.

Biography
The Theravada tradition depicts Asita as an advisor and chaplain to Sihahanu, the grandfather of Gotama Buddha. He was the teacher of Suddhodana, and then served him as he had his father. At the time of the birth of the Buddha, he had retired by permission of Suddhodana and was living in the forest as an ascetic.
A vision alerted Asita of the birth of the [Bodhisattva](5098) Gotama, causing him to leave the forest and travel to see the infant, where he prophesied that he would become either a 'wheel turning monarch' (chakravartin) or a Buddha. Disappointed that his own life would end before the Buddha awakened and began preaching, he ordained his nephew, Nalaka, so that he would be able to hear the Buddha's teachings. Nalaka is called Naradatta in the Lalitavistara.

Early life
Siddhartha Gautama was born into the royal family of the Shakya clan, having his father being King Suddhodana, he grew up to be a respected sage in the mountains who often noticed extraordinary signs in the heavens. These signs made him decide to visit the newborn prince to discern his future.

Asita's prediction
Asita’s seriousness of manner and religious fervor in solitude pleased the Gods. When Asita heard of the birth of he who would save mankind from the pain of rebirth, he traveled to King Suddhodana’s palace and approached respectfully towards the women’s quarters. Asita wanted to know the true law. 
The king addressed Asita courteously and felt happy that the honorable Asita had favored him with a purposeful visit. The king then asked Asita what he must do as his disciple.
Asita explained that the birth of the king’s son was due to the king’s generosity, kindness, and love of duty towards old, wise people. Another reason was because of his wealthy ancestors, who were rich in goodness.
Also, Asita told the king that he had heard a divine voice speaking to him. It revealed that the king of the Sakyas had a newly born son, who possessed true knowledge. Immediately, Asita went to visit the king. He wanted to see for himself the glory of the king’s son. The hermit joyfully declared, "This has happened to you, O noble, generous and hospitable king, because you love duty and because you are ever kind to those who are wise and to those who are full of years. This has happened to you because your ancestors, though rich in land and rich in gold, were above all rich in virtue. Know the reason for my coming, O king, and rejoice. In the air I heard a divine voice speaking and it said: 'A son has been born to the king of the Sakyas, a son who will have the true knowledge.' I heard these words, and I came, and my eyes shall now behold the glory of the Sakyas" (Herold 13).
Joyfully, the king went to the baby’s nurse and brought the baby to Asita. The king noticed that the king’s son had marks of omnipotence. After gazing on him further, Asita’s eyes were filled with tears, and he sighed regretfully, turning his eyes upward towards heaven.  
After seeing Asita crying, the king was afraid for his son. He then asked Asita to explain the reason for his tears since his son’s body showed little difference from that of a God’s. He also asked whether his son’s life was so fragile that he would die at a young age.   
Asita answered that he had spoken the truth about the child’s great glory and that his tears were for himself since his life would end soon. Yet, the king’s powerful son would destroy rebirth’s evil. The baby would surrender his godly power, control his passions, understand truth, and error would vanish from the world before his knowledge. He would rescue the suffering world from its evils. 
His knowledge would lead him to his duty, which would be to reveal his knowledge to individuals who desperately asked for it from him. He would also point out to tormented and lost individuals the road that would lead to salvation. Then he would set free passionate individuals, who were enslaved by their desires. He would set the world free, too, because he would have perfect understanding.       
Therefore, Asita told the king to put away his sorrow, which should only be felt towards those people who would not hear his son’s voice. For this reason, Asita continued, I weep that in spite of my serious contemplation and prayers, I will never know your son’s message and law. In addition, great king, pity the individual who ascends to the highest states of contemplation and prayer yet does not hear your son’s voice.

Significance of Asita’s predictions
Asita's predictions confirmed the extraordinary future awaiting Siddhartha Gautama when he saw the promising marks on the newborn prince, he prophesied that Siddhartha would either become a great king or a great spiritual teacher. This prediction highlighted the significant choice Siddhartha would eventually face between living a life of luxury or pursuing a spiritual path. Overall, the prophecy is crucial in the story of the Buddha because of how it paved the way for Siddhartha’s eventual decision to leave his princely life in search of a spiritual path. Asita's predictions add a sense of destiny and omniscience to the Buddha's journey, by emphasizing the importance of his choice and the impact he would have in the world of [Buddhism](5001).

Names and related figures
Asita was known under several alternate names or nicknames, and Buddhaghosa attributed his name to his dark complexion. He was known as Kanha Devala, Kanha Siri or Siri Kanha, and Kāla Devala. 
Another sage or rishi known as Asita Devala is sometimes confused with him in literary sources- this second Asita Devala was a sage from ancient times who was reborn as a disciple of the Buddha. This confusion may explain why in the Lalitavistara Sūtra there are two versions of Asita's prophecy- one where Asita visits Suddhodana as described in the Pali sources, and another where Asita is a hermit living in the Himalayas who never meets Suddhodana but perceives the birth of the Buddha due to his supernatural powers.
The Pali tradition also records a pratyekabuddha called Asita, and a man who lived at the time of Sikkhi Buddha who was reborn as a disciple of Gotama Buddha.
Early Western scholars related Asita to Simeon, who blessed Jesus as an infant.

References
Bibliography
Herold, André-Ferdinand. The Life of Buddha According to the Legends of Ancient India. United States, A.&C. Boni, 1927.
“Asita: Dictionary of [Buddhism](5001): Nichiren [Buddhism](5001) Library.” Asita | Dictionary of [Buddhism](5001) | Nichiren [Buddhism](5001) Library, www.nichirenlibrary.org/en/dic/Content/A/102. Accessed 10 May 2024.