5097
Bodhipakkhiyādhammā
In [Buddhism](5001), the bodhipakkhiyā dhammā (Pali; variant spellings include bodhipakkhikā dhammā and bodhapakkhiyā dhammā; Skt.: bodhipakṣa dharma) are qualities (dhammā) conducive or related to (pakkhiya) awakening/understanding (bodhi), i.e. the factors and wholesome qualities which are developed when the mind is trained (bhavana). 
In the Pali commentaries, the term bodhipakkhiyā dhammā is used to refer to seven sets of such qualities regularly attributed to the Buddha throughout the Pali Canon. Within these seven sets of bodhi-related qualities, there is listed a total of thirty-seven repetitious and interrelated qualities (sattatiṃsa bodhipakkhiyā dhammā).
These seven sets of qualities are recognized by both Theravadan and Mahayanan Buddhists as complementary facets of the Buddhist path to bodhi.

Seven sets of thirty-seven qualities
In the Pali Canon's Bhāvanānuyutta sutta ("Mental Development Discourse," AN 7.67), the Buddha is recorded as saying:

Monks, although a monk who does not apply himself to the meditative development of his mind bhavana may wish, "Oh, that my mind might be free from the taints by  non-clinging!", yet his mind will not be freed.  For what reason? "Because he has not developed his mind," one has to say. Not developed it in what? In the four foundations of mindfulness, the four right kinds of striving, the four bases of success, the five spiritual faculties, the five spiritual powers, the seven factors of enlightenment and the Noble Eightfold Path.
Elsewhere in the Canon, and in numerous places in the āgamas of other early schools, these seven sets of thirty-seven qualities conducive to Enlightenment are enumerated as:

Four establishments/presences of mindfulness (cattāro satipaṭṭhānā)
Mindfulness of the body (kāyānupassanā, S. kayānupasthāna)
Mindfulness of feelings (vedanānupassanā, S. vedanānupasthāna)
Mindfulness of mental states (cittānupassanā, S. cittanupasthāna)
Mindfulness of mental qualities (dhammānupassanā, S. dharmanupasthāna)

Four right exertions/efforts/strivings (cattāro sammappadhānā)
Effort for the preventing of unskillful states to arise anuppādāya
Effort for the abandoning of the already arisen unskillful states pahānāya
Effort for the arising of skillful states uppādāya
Effort for the sustaining and increasing of arisen skillful states ṭhitiyā

Four bases of spiritual power (cattāro iddhipādā)
Intention or will (chanda, S. chanda)
Effort (viriya, S. vīrya)
Consciousness (citta, S. citta)
Skill of Analysis (vīmaṁsa or vīmaŋsā, S. mimāṃsā)

Five spiritual faculties (pañca indriya)
Conviction (saddhā, S. śraddhā)
Effort (viriya, S. vīrya)
Mindfulness (sati, S. smṛti)
Concentration/Unification (samādhi, S. samādhi)
Wisdom (paññā, S. prajñā)

Five Strengths (pañca bala)
Conviction (saddhā, S. śraddhā})
Effort (viriya, S. vīrya)
Mindfulness (sati, S. smṛti)
Concentration/Unification (samādhi, S. samādhi)
Wisdom (paññā, S. prajñā)

Seven Factors of bodhi (awakening, understanding) (satta bojjhaṅgā)
Mindfulness (sati, S. smṛti)
Investigation (dhamma vicaya, S. dharmapravicaya)
Effort (viriya, S. vīrya)
Joy (pīti, S. prīti)
Tranquillity (passaddhi, S. praśrabdhi)
Concentration/Unification (samādhi, S. samādhi)
Equanimity (upekkhā, S. upekṣā)

Noble Eightfold Path (ariya aṭṭhaṅgika magga)
Right Understanding (sammā diṭṭhi, S. samyag-dṛṣṭi)
Right Intention (sammā saṅkappa, S. samyak-saṃkalpa)
Right Speech (sammā vācā, S. samyag-vāc)
Right Action (sammā kammanta, S. samyak-karmānta)
Right Livelihood (sammā ājīva, S. samyag-ājīva)
Right Effort/Energy (sammā vāyāma, S. samyag-vyāyāma)
Right Mindfulness (sammā sati, S. samyak-smṛti)
Right Concentration/Unification (sammā samādhi, S. samyak-samādhi)

Forty-one and forty-three qualities
A sutta found in The Senior Collection of Gandhāran Buddhist texts ascribes forty one instead of thirty seven beneficial dharmas. The Gandharan text includes rūpajhānas which the Pali tradition does not. Salomon notes this forty one numbered list appears in both a Chinese translation of the Dirghagama which current scholarship believes to be of the Dharmaguptaka school of [Buddhism](5001) and a Chinese translation of the Dharmaguptaka vinaya.
In the Pali Canon's Nettipakaraṇa (Netti 112) forty-three qualities connected with awakening (tecattālīsa bodhipakkhiyā dhammā) are mentioned which, according to the commentaries, include the aforementioned thirty-seven plus the following six contemplations (also found in the suttas, e.g. Saṅgīti Sutta D iii 251)

The contemplation of the three marks of existence:
impermanence (aniccasaññā)
suffering (dukkhasaññā)
non-self (anattasaññā)
abandoning (pahānasaññā)
dispassion (virāgasaññā)
cessation (nirodhasaññā)

In the Pali literature
The technical term, bodhipakkhiyā dhammā, explicitly referring to the seven sets of qualities identified above, is first encountered in the Pali commentaries; nonetheless, the seven sets of bodhipakkhiya dhammas are themselves first collated, enumerated, and referenced in the Sutta Pitaka and [Abhidhamma](5006) Pitaka.

Sutta Pitaka
In the Digha Nikāya's famed Maha-parinibbana Sutta (DN 16), which recounts the Buddha's last days, in the Buddha's last address to his assembly of followers he states:Now, O bhikkhus, I say to you that these teachings of which I have direct knowledge and which I have made known to you—these you should thoroughly learn, cultivate, develop, and frequently practice, that the life of purity may be established and may long endure, for the welfare and happiness of the multitude, out of compassion for the world, for the benefit, well being, and happiness of gods and men.
And what, bhikkhus, are these teachings? They are the four foundations of mindfulness, the four right efforts, the four constituents of psychic power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven factors of enlightenment, and the Noble Eightfold Path. These, bhikkhus, are the teachings of which I have direct knowledge, which I have made known to you, and which you should thoroughly learn, cultivate, develop, and frequently practice....In the Majjhima Nikāya's "Greater Discourse to Sakuludāyin" (MN 77), when asked why his disciples venerated him, the Buddha identified five qualities he possessed: highest virtues (adhisīle ... paramena sīlakkhandha); highest knowledge and vision (abhikkante ñāṇadassane); highest wisdom (adhipaññāya ... paramena paññākkhandha); his explanation of the Four Noble Truths (ariyasaccāni); and, his identification of numerous ways to develop wholesome states.
The Buddha's elaboration of the last item included the seven sets of thirty-seven bodhipakkhiya dhammas which are enumerated individually in this discourse. 
In the Samyutta Nikaya, the fifth division's first seven chapters are each devoted to one of the bodhipakkhiya dhammas. While there is a great deal of repetition among these chapters' discourses, these seven chapters include almost 900 discourses.
In the [Anguttara Nikaya](5033)'s "Upajjhāyasuttaṃ" (AN 5.6.6), the Buddha recommends five things for a monk to overcome spiritual hindrances: control mental faculties; eat the right amount of food; maintain wakefulness; be aware of merit; and, develop the bodhipakkhiya dhammas throughout the day.
In the Khuddaka Nikāya, the bodhipakkhiya dhammas are mentioned at Iti. 82, Th. 900, and Nett. 31, 112, 197, 237, 240 and 261.

[Abhidhamma](5006) Pitaka
The bodhipakkhiyā dhammā are mentioned in several passages of the [Abhidhamma](5006), such as at Vbh. sections 571 and 584.

Commentaries
In the Visuddhimagga, Buddhaghosa enumerates the seven sets of bodhipakkhiya dhammas along with a relevant Sutta Pitaka discourse (Vism. XXII.33), describes each set (Vism. XXII.34-38), and describes their existence in the consciousness of an arahant (Vism. XXII.39-40).  In addition, Buddhaghosa factors the 37 qualities in a manner so as to describe fourteen non-redundant qualities (Vism. XXII.40-43); thus, for instance, while nine qualities (zeal, consciousness, joy, tranquility, equanimity, intention, speech, action, livelihood) are mentioned only once in the full list of 37 qualities, the other five qualities are mentioned multiple times. Table 1 below identifies the five qualities spanning multiple bodhipakkhiya-dhamma sets.

In terms of other Pali commentaries, the bodhipakkhiyā dhammā are also mentioned in Dhammapada-Aṭṭhakathā (DhA i.230), Suttanipāta-Aṭṭhakathā (SnA 164), and Jātaka-Aṭṭhakathā (J i.275, iii.290, and v.483).

See also
Basic Points Unifying the Theravada and the Mahayana – Buddhist ecumenical statement in 1967Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Bojjhanga – Spiritual qualities for Buddhist AwakeningPages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets
Five Strengths – Buddhist philosophical concept
Four Noble Truths – Basic framework of Buddhist thought
Four Right Exertions – Buddhist philosophical concept
Index of [Buddhism](5001)-related articles – Alphabetical listing of [Buddhism](5001) related topics
Satipatthana – Mindfulness in [Buddhism](5001)
Secular [Buddhism](5001) – Form of non-dogmatic [Buddhism](5001)
Three marks of existence – Buddhist concept; consists of impermanence (anicca), suffering (dukkha), and non-self (anattā)
Threefold Training – Buddhist practices for higher virtue, mind, and wisdom

Notes
References
Sources
Further reading
Gethin, R.M.L. (2001), The Buddhist Path to Awakening: A Study of the [Bodhi](5092)-Pakkhiyā Dhammā, Oneworld Publishers, ISBN 978-1851682850
Sayadaw, Ledi (1904). The Requisites of Enlightenment: A Manual by the Venerable Ledi Sayadaw. BPS Pariyatti Editions. ISBN 978-1-68172-341-9.

External links
Buddhist Encyclopedia (n.d.). Seven Sets. 
Wings to Awakening: An Anthology from the Pali Canon.  by Thanissaro [Bhikkhu](5082)