5115
Adab (Islam)
Adab ([Arabic](4233): أدب) in the context of behavior, refers to prescribed [Islam](5101)ic etiquette: "refinement, good manners, morals, decorum, decency, humaneness". Al-Adab ([Arabic](4233): الآداب) has been defined as "decency, morals".
While interpretation of the scope and particulars of Adab may vary among different cultures, common among these interpretations is regard for personal standing through the observation of certain codes of behavior. To exhibit Adab would be to show "proper discrimination of correct order, behavior, and taste."
[Islam](5101) has rules of etiquette and an ethical code involving every aspect of life. Muslims refer to Adab as good manners, courtesy, respect, and appropriateness, covering acts such as entering or exiting a washroom, posture when sitting, and cleansing oneself.

Customs and behaviour
Practitioners of [Islam](5101) are generally taught to follow some specific customs in their daily lives. Most of these customs can be traced back to [Abraham](1735)ic traditions in pre-[Islam](5101)ic Arabian society. Due to Muhammad's sanction or tacit approval of such practices, these customs are considered to be Sunnah (practices of Muhammad as part of the religion) by the Ummah (Muslim nation). It includes customs like:

Saying "Bismillah" (in the name of [Allah](5160)) before eating and drinking.
Drinking in 3 gulps slowly
Using the right hand for drinking and eating.
Saying "Assalaamualaikum warahmathullahi wabarakaatuhu" (may peace, mercy and blessings of [Allah](5160) be upon you) when meeting someone and answering with "Wa 'alaikumus salam warahmathullahi wabarakaatuhu" (and peace mercy and blessings of [Allah](5160) be upon you also ).
Saying "[Alhamdulillah](5156)" (all gratitude and praise is for only [Allah](5160)) when sneezing and responding with "Yarhamukallah" ([Allah](5160) have mercy on you).
In the sphere of hygiene, it includes:
Clipping the moustache
Removing armpit hair regardless of gender
Cutting nails
Circumcising the male offspring
Cleaning the nostrils, the mouth, and the teeth
Cleaning the body after urination and defecation
Not entering a host's home until one has made sure their presence is welcome (hatta tasta nisu)
Abstention from sexual relations during the menstrual cycle and the puerperal discharge,Quran 2:222 and ceremonial bath after the menstrual cycle, and Janabah (seminal/ovular discharge or sexual intercourse).Quran 4:43Quran 5:6
Burial rituals include funeral prayer of bathed and enshrouded body in coffin cloth and burying it in a grave.
The list above is far from comprehensive. As [Islam](5101) sees itself as more of a way of life than a religion, [Islam](5101)ic adab is concerned with all areas of an individual's life, not merely the list mentioned above.

Evolution of the term
The term simply meant "behavior" in pre-[Islam](5101)ic Arabia, although it included other norms and habits of conduct.  The term does not appear very often in the 7th century (1st [Islam](5101)ic century).  With the spread of [Islam](5101), it acquired a meaning of "practical ethics" (rather than directly religious strictures) around the 8th century.  By the 9th century (3rd [Islam](5101)ic century), its connotations had expanded, especially when used as a loanword in non-[Arabic](4233) speaking regions.  It became a loose term to describe actions and knowledge expected of a civilized and cultured Muslim: proper conduct, knowledge of [Arabic](4233) literature and poetry, and rhetorical eloquence.  Among the lower strata of society, it acquired something of its modern meanings of civility, courtesy, manners, and decency.  [Islam](5101)ic religious scholars applied the term to cover a whole range of appropriate behavior, and the term frequently appears in hadiths.  The term became popular and used in many contexts; for example, in the 10th century, the Brethren of Purity (Ikhwān al-Ṣafā) devoted much text to their philosophical exploration of the adab, and Abu Hayyan al-Tawhidi wrote extensively on the topic.  Abu Ishaq al-Tha'labi also wrote extensively, drawing a program for society and human conduct in general in his work based on adab.
The related term tadīb is the verb form where adab is trained or taught to another.

Examples in hadiths of encouraging Adab
Hadith
Sunni hadith
Abu 'Amr ash-Shaybani said, "The owner of this house (and he pointed at the house of 'Abdullah ibn Mas'ud) said, "I asked the Prophet, may [Allah](5160) bless him and grant him peace, which action [Allah](5160) loves best. He replied, 'Prayer at its proper time.' 'Then what?' I asked. He said, 'Then kindness to parents." I asked, 'Then what?' He replied, 'Then fighting towards (jihad in) the Way of God ([Allah](5160)).'" He added, "He told me about these things. If I had asked him to tell me more, he would have told me more." Kitab Al Adab Al Mufrad p. 29  Qahwama.com

Shia hadith
[Ali ibn Abi Talib](5158) the first Shiite Imam said:" Whoever leads the people must discipline others in his own way, deeds, and behavior before disciplining others with his language, and his instructor and educator deserve more respect than the educator and educator of the people".
and Ali ibn Husayn Zayn al-Abidin said:"It is your child's right to bring him up with good manners and morals".

Literature
A class of literature known as Adab is found in [Islam](5101)ic history. These were works written on the proper etiquette, manners for various professions and for ordinary Muslims, (examples include "manuals of advice for kings on how to rule and for physicians on how to care for patients"), and also works of fiction literature  that provide moral exemplars within their stories.

See also
Etiquette in the Middle East
List of [Islam](5101)ic terms in [Arabic](4233)
lexicon

Notes and references

Bruce Privratsky, Muslim Turkistan, pgs. 98-99