5174
Angels in Islam
In [Islam](5101), angels (Arabic: ملاك٬ ملك‎, romanized: malāk; plural: ملائِكة‎, malāʾik/malāʾikah or Persian: فرشته, romanized: ferešte) are believed to be heavenly beings, created from a luminous origin by God. The Quran is the principal source for the [Islam](5101)ic concept of angels, but more extensive features of angels appear in hadith literature, Mi'raj literature, [Islam](5101)ic exegesis, theology, philosophy, and mysticism.

Generally, belief in angels is one of the core tenets within [Islam](5101), as it is one of the six articles of faith. Angels are more prominent in [Islam](5101) compared to Judeo-Christian tradition. The angels differ from other invisible creatures in their attitude as creatures of virtue, in contrast to evil devils (Arabic: شَيَاطِين, romanized: šayāṭīn or Persian: دیو, romanized: dīv) and ambiguous jinn (Arabic: جِنّ or Persian: پَری, romanized: parī). Despite being considered to be virtuous beings, angels are not necessarily bringers of good news, as per [Islam](5101)ic tradition, angels can perform grim and violent tasks.
Angels are conceptualized as heavenly beings. As such, they are said to lack passion and bodily desires. If angels can nevertheless fail, is debated in [Islam](5101). Contemporary Salafis usually hold the opinion that angels are always obedient and never fail to perform their tasks. In contrast, schools of theology (Kalām) often accept the fallibility of angels. Māturīdites say that the heavenly creatures are tested, and angels may fail such a test, whereupon they are dismissed from their duties. Some Ashʿarite likewise argue that angels can fail, but have no free-will. In contrast, most Mu'tazilites, including some Asharis such as al-Razi, consider angels to lack free-will and being infallible.
In [Islam](5101)ic philosophy and Sufism, angels are related to the nature of reason ('aql). According to Sufi cosmology, they connect the higher realms of the intellect with the lower world of matter. Thus, the human mind is conceptualized to form a connection with the heavenly spheres (malakūt) through such heavenly entities associated with (nūr). In contrast, the devils attempt to disturb the connection by diverging the mind to the lower spheres, thus associated with fire (nār).

Etymology
The Quranic word for angel (Arabic: ملك, romanized: malak) derives either from Malaka, meaning "he controlled", due to their power to govern different affairs assigned to them, or from the triliteral root '-l-k, l-'-k or m-l-k with the broad meaning of a "messenger", just as its counterpart in Hebrew (malʾákh). Unlike the Hebrew word, however, the term is used exclusively for heavenly spirits of the divine world, as opposed to human messengers. The Quran refers to both angelic and human messengers as rasul instead.

Characteristics
In [Islam](5101), angels are heavenly creatures created by God. They are considered older than humans and jinn. Although Muslim authors disagree on the exact nature of angels, they agree that they are autonomous entities with subtle bodies.: 508  Yet, both concepts of angels as anthropomorphic creatures with wings and as abstract forces are acknowledged. Angels play an important role in Muslim everyday life by protecting the believers from evil influences and recording the deeds of humans. They have different duties, including their praise of God, interacting with humans in ordinary life, defending against devils (shayāṭīn) and carrying on natural phenomena. 
In [Islam](5101)ic philosophy angelic qualities, just as devilish ones, are assumed to be part of human's nature, the angelic one related to the spirit (ruh) and reason (aql), while the devilish one to egoism. Angels might accompany aspiring saints or advise pious humans.
One of the [Islam](5101)ic major characteristic is their lack of bodily desires; they never get tired, do not eat or drink, and have no anger. Various [Islam](5101)ic scholars such as Ibn Kathir, Ibn Taymiyya, [Al-Tabari](5151), Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, and Umar Sulaiman Al-Ashqar also quoted that angels do not need to consume food or drinks. They are also described as immortal, unlike jinn. In [Islam](5101)ic traditions, they are described as being created from incorporeal light (Nūr) or fire (Nar). Ahmad Sirhindi, a 17th-century Indian scholar, has added, that angels can take various shapes.

Purity
Angels believed to be engaged in human affairs are closely related to [Islam](5101)ic purity and modesty rituals. Many hadiths, including Muwatta Imam Malik from one of the Kutub al-Sittah, talk about angels being repelled by humans' state of impurity.: 323  It is argued that if driven away by ritual impurity, the Kiraman Katibin, who record people's actions,: 325  and the guardian angel,: 327  will not perform their tasks assigned to the individual. Another hadith specifies, during the state of impurity, bad actions are still written down, but good actions are not. 
When a person tells a lie, angels nearby are separated from the person from the stench the lie emanates.: 328  Angels also depart from humans when they are naked or are having a bath out of decency, but also curse people who are nude in public.: 328  Ahmad Sirhindi has mentioned that the angels nobility are because their substances are created from luminous light.
Angels are believed to be attracted to clean and sacred places. Impure conditions, such as dogs or unclean places, may impede an angels' duty.

Obedience
The possibility and degree of angels errability is debated in [Islam](5101). Hasan of Basra (d. 728) is often considered one of the first who asserted the doctrine of angelic infallibility. When discussing the nature of Iblis, Tabari does not mention angelic infallibility, the idea might not have been universal in early [Islam](5101). Thus, from the traditions of ibn Abbas (angels can sin) and Hasan of Basra (angels cannot sin) two different opinions derived. In a comment by Gibril Haddad on Qadi Baydawi's defense on angelic fallibility in his Tafsir al-Baydawi it is said that the angels' "obedience is their nature while their disobedience is a burden, while human beings' obedience is a burden and their hankering after lust is their nature.": 546

Infallible
Opposition to the concept of the fallen angel is mostly found among the Qadariyah and most Mu'tazilites. Many Salafis also agree with this view. Those who oppose angelic fallibility refer to Surah at-Tahrim (66:6) in favor of their position:

O believers! Protect yourselves and your families from a Fire whose fuel is people and stones, overseen by formidable and severe angels, who never disobey whatever [Allah](5160) orders—always doing as commanded.

Fakhr al-Din al-Razi is an exception to most mutakallimūn, and agrees that angels are free from any form of sin and includes angelic infallibility to the six articles of faith.
Al-Razi argues that "except Iblis" (2:34, 18:50) is read as an "uninterupted exception" (istithna munqathi), excluding Iblis from the group of angels and states that he hailed from jinn species instead. Ibn Taimiyya rejects any ambiguity on the nature of Iblis and portrays him as a satanic jinni in contrast to the angels. Following the opinions of ibn Taimiyya and his disciple ibn Kathir, many scholars of Salafism and Wahhabism agree on this. Furthermore, many of them regard this as a major difference between Christianity and [Islam](5101).

Fallible
Surah 2:30 portrays the angels arguing with God about the creation of [Adam](110), since [Adam](110)'s progeny will cause suffering. From among the angels, Iblis refuses to pay homage to [Adam](110) and is banned. The phrase "except Iblis" in 2:34 and 18:50 is understood as an uninterupted exception (istithna' muttasil). A possible reconciliation of Iblis' fall and the doctrine of angelic impeccability is to say that God wanted Iblis to disobey or that Iblis' disobedience derives from noble yet misguided motivation. 

Al-Maturidi (853–944 CE) rejects that angels are free from sin altogether, stating that angels too are tested and also have free-will based on the Quran:By calling the stars adornment of the heavens, we can deduce another meaning: that is, the inhabitants of the heavens themselves are put to the test to see which of them is the best in deeds, (...)
Those who are in support of the concept of fallen angels (including Tabari, Suyuti, al-Nasafi, and al-Māturīdī) refer to al-Anbiya (21:29) stating that angels would be punished for sins and arguing that, if angels could not sin, they would not be warned to refrain from commiting them:Whoever of them were to say, "I am a god besides Him", they would be rewarded with Hell by Us ...
Besides the case of Iblis, the presence of Harut and Marut in the Quran, further hindered their complete absolution from potentially sinning.: 548  Although not explicit in the Quran, some exegetes linked them to Iblis, and the angels with him, protesting the creation of [Adam](110).

Sufism
Just as in non-Sufi-related traditions, angels are thought of as created of light. Al-Jili specifies that the angels are created from the Light of Muhammad and in his attribute of guidance, light and beauty. Influenced by Ibn Arabi's Sufi metaphysics, Haydar Amuli identifies angels as created to represent different names/attributes of God's beauty, while the devils are created in accordance with God's attributes of Majesty, such as "The Haughty" or "The Domineering".
Andalusian scholar ibn Arabi argues that a human generally ranks below angels, but developed to al-Insān al-Kāmil, ranks above them. While most earlier Sufis (like Hasan al-Basri) advised their disciples to imitate the angels, Ibn-Arabi advised them to surpass the angels. The angels being merely a reflection of the Divine Names in accordance within the spiritual realm, humans experience the Names of God manifested both in the spiritual and in the material world. This reflects the major opinion that prophets and messengers among humans rank above angels, but the ordinary human below an angel, while the messengers among angels rank higher than prophets and messengers among humans. Ibn Arabi elaborates his ranking in al-Futuhat based on a report by Tirmidhi. Accordingly, Muhammad intercedes for the angels first, then for (other) prophets, saints, believers, animals, plants and inanimate objects last, this explaining the hierarchy of beings in general Muslim thought.
In  Sufism, angels do not appear as merely models for the mystic but also their companions. Humans, in a state between earth and heaven, seek angels as guidance to reach the upper realms. Some authors have suggested that some individual angels in the microcosmos represent specific human faculties on a macrocosmic level. According to a common belief, if a Sufi can not find a sheikh to teach him, he will be taught by the angel Khidr. The presence of an angel depends on human's obedience to divine law. Dirt, depraved morality and desecration may ward off an angel. A saint might be given the ability to see angels as gift (karāmāt) from God.
Ahmad al-Tijani, founder of the Tijaniyyah order, narrates that angels are created through the words of humans. Through good words an angel of mercy is created, but through evil words an angel of punishment is created. By God's degree, if someone repents from evil words, the angel of punishment may turn into an angel of mercy.

Philosophy (Falsafa)
Muslim philosophers, such as al-Fārābī and Ibn Sīnā, drew from [Aristotelianism](4961) and Neo-Platonism a hierarchy of causal effects. God created the divine Intellect known from Aristotelian cosmology and the writings of Plotinus, identified with an angel (usually Gabriel). The archangel then influences other cosmic intellects who in turn influence the sublunary world.
Muslim theologians (mutakallimun), for example al-Suyuti and al-Taftazani, generally rejected the philosophical depiction of angels as immaterial beings, since angels are, according to ḥadīṯ, created from light (nūr). In response to the invisibility of angels, Taftazani argues that only God is immaterial and that angels evade perception due to their transparent bodies.
The influential Sunni Muslim author al-Ghazali (c. 1058–19 December 1111) reconciled the [Islam](5101)ic Neo-Platonist with traditional Sufi interpretations. He divides human nature into four domains, each representing another type of creature: animals, beasts, devils and angels. The spiritual components are related to (malakut), the plane in which symbols take on form, angels and devils advise the human hearth (qalb). However, the angels also inhabit the realm beyond considered the realm from which reason ('aql) derives from and devils have no place.
While the angels endow the human mind with reason, advices virtues and leads to worshipping God, the devil perverts the mind and tempts to abusing the spiritual nature by committing sins, such as lying, betrayal, and deceit. The angelic natures advices how to use the animalistic body properly, while the devil perverts it. In this regard, the plane of a human is, unlike whose of the jinn (here: angels and devils)  and animals, not pre-determined. Humans are potentially both angels and devils, depending on whether the sensual soul or the rational soul develop.

Modern interpretations
[Islam](5101)ic Modernist scholars such as Muhammad Asad and Ghulam Ahmed Parwez have suggested a metaphorical reinterpretation of the concept of angels.
Wahhabism and Salafism, on the other hand, emphasizes a literal interpretation of angels and reject a metaphorical one as a form of unbelief or illicit innovation (bidʿah), believed to be brought by secularism and Positivism. Salafi scholar Muhammad ibn al-Uthaymin considers the belief in angels as literal, physical, and sentient creatures as one of the six articles of faith in [Islam](5101).
In contrast to traditional accounts on angels, many Salafi scholars, such as members of the Muslim Brotherhood Sayyid Qutb and Umar Sulaiman Al-Ashqar, disregard material previously well-accepted in [Islam](5101)ic tradition, such as the story of Harut and Marut or the name the Angel of Death (ʿAzrāʾīl). Sulayman Ashqar not only rejects the traditional material itself, he furthermore disapproves of scholars who use them.

Classification of angels
[Islam](5101) has no standard hierarchical organization that parallels the division into different "choirs" or spheres hypothesized and drafted by early medieval Christian theologians, but generally distinguishes between the angels in heaven (karubiyin) fully absorbed in the ma'rifa (knowledge) of God and the messengers (rasūl) who carry out divine decrees between heaven and earth. Others add a third group of angels, and categorize angels into İlliyyûn Mukarrebûn (those around God's throne), Mudabbirât (carrying the laws of nature), and Rasūl (messengers). Since angels are not equal in status and are consequently delegated to different tasks to perform, some authors of tafsir (mufassirūn) divided angels into different categories.
Al-Baydawi records that Muslim scholars divide angels in at least two groups: those who are self-immersed in knowledge of "the Truth" (al-Haqq), based on "they laud night and day, they never wane" (21:29), they are the "highmost" and "angels brought near" and those who are the executors of commands, based on "they do not disobey [Allah](5160) in what He commanded them but they do what they are commanded" (66:6), who are the administers of the command of heaven to earth.: 509 
Fakhr al-Din al-Razi (d. 1209) divided the angels into eight groups, which shows some resemblance to Christian angelology:

Hamalat al-'Arsh, those who carry the 'Arsh (Throne of God), comparable to the Christian Seraphim.
Muqarrabun (Cherubim), who surround the throne of God, constantly praising God (tasbīḥ)
[Archangel](5188)s, such as Jibrāʾīl, Mīkhāʾīl, Isrāfīl, and ʿAzrāʾīl
Angels of Paradise, such as Riḍwān.
Angels of Hell, Mālik and Zabānīya
Guardian angels, who are assigned to individuals to protect them
The angels who record the actions of people
Angels entrusted with the affairs of the world, like the angel of thunder.

Angels in [Islam](5101)ic art
Angels in [Islam](5101)ic art often appear in illustrated manuscripts of Muhammad's life. Other common depictions of angels in [Islam](5101)ic art include angels with [Adam](110) and Eve in the garden of Eden, angels discerning the saved from the damned on the Day of Judgement, and angels as a repeating motif in borders or textiles. [Islam](5101)ic depictions of angels resemble winged Christian angels, although [Islam](5101)ic angels are typically shown with multicolored wings. Angels, such as the archangel Gabriel, are typically depicted as masculine, which is consistent with God's rejection of feminine depictions of angels in several verses of Quran. Nevertheless, later depictions of angels in [Islam](5101)ic art are more feminine and androgynous.
The 13th century book Ajā'ib al-makhlūqāt wa gharā'ib al-mawjūdāt (The Wonders of Creation) by Zakariya al-Qazwini describes [Islam](5101)ic angelology, and is often illustrated with many images of angels. The angels are typically depicted with bright, vivid colors, giving them unusual liveliness and other-worldly translucence. While some angels are referred to as "Guardians of the Kingdom of God," others are associated with hell. An undated manuscript of The Wonders of Creation from the Bavarian State Library in Munich includes depictions of angels both alone and alongside humans and animals. Angels are also illustrated in Timurid and Ottoman manuscripts, such as The Timurid Book of the Prophet Muhammad's Ascension (Mir'ajnama) and the Siyer-i Nebi.

Bektashi [Alevism](4846)
Despite its heterodoxy, Alevis believe in the Quran, the revelation by Muhammad, the afterlife, and angels, pretty much as Sunnis do. Like orthodox Muslims, Alevis believe that Muhammad undertook the heavenly journey guided by the angel Gabriel (Turkish: Cebrâil), mentioned in the Quran (Surah 17), as evident from the miraçlama, a form of poetry (deyiş) remniscient of Anatolian folk songs. Alevis affirm the Quranic message that angels were ordered to bow down before [Adam](110), and for that reason, believe that humans inherent a special status. Some Alevis believe that good and bad angels are merely symbols and do not believe in their literal existence.
Angels are also mentioned in Alevi-spiritual literature. The cosmology outllined in the Buyruks ascribes a central role to angels. Accordingly, when God created the angels, God tested them by asking who they are. Those angels who responded "You are the Creator and I am the created." were the good angels, while those who claimed independency by stating "You are you; I am I" were burned. Whereby, the destroyed angels feature as an example of spiritual ignorance. Similar to the Quran, the story continues with that the angel Azâzîl, overcome by his ego, refuses to bow before the light, arguing that the light is a created thing and thus, cannot be the creator, and accordingly unworthy of prostration. In contrast to Sunni tradition however, the light symbolizes [Ali](5157) and Muhammad, not [Adam](110). Besides Gabriel and Azazil, other angels, such as the Kiraman Katibin also appear in the text.

See also
Angels in art
Angels in Judaism
List of theological angels
List of theological demons
Peri

Notes


== References ==