5222
Aish HaTorah
Aish formerly known as Aish HaTorah (Hebrew: אש התורה, lit. "Fire of the Torah"), is a Jewish educational organization. The focus of Aish is to spread traditional teachings to Jews around the globe utilizing a massive online presence made up of its website Aish.com and various social media channels. In addition to the educational organization there is also a yeshiva and women's seminary as well as several other in-person programs that make up the organization's main campus in Jerusalem.

History
Aish was established in Jerusalem in 1974 by Rabbi Noah Weinberg, after he left the Ohr Somayach yeshiva, which he had previously co-founded. The organization worked to educate young Jewish students, often travelers and volunteers, in the history and traditions of Orthodox Judaism. It later expanded worldwide, and established 30 branches, each is currently run as its own separate entity. Aish continues to promote an extensive array of education classes,  as well as online educational content. After Noah Weinberg died in February 2009, his son Rabbi Hillel Weinberg served as interim dean for a few years. In 2015 Rabbi Steven Burg was named the CEO of the organization, and in 2019 Rabbi Yitzchak Berkovits was named Rosh Yeshiva  and continues to lead the Jerusalem Yeshiva to this day.

Philosophy
Study in the Yeshiva blends the traditions of the Lithuanian yeshivas with the doctrines of Hasidism. Weinberg himself was a product of Lithuanian schools but he was also a grandson of the Slonimer Rebbe. His teachings reflect influences of both schools as well as certain facets of the Kabbalah of Moshe Chaim Luzzatto, the Vilna Gaon and others.
The organization is politically conservative and its officials have stated they oppose a full hand over of the West Bank to the Palestinians.

Programs
Aish HaTorah operates about 30 full-time branches on five continents, providing seminars, singles events, executive learning groups, Shabbat and Jewish holiday programs, and community building.
Aish.com
Aish has an interactive-online website at Aish.com which hosts a wealth of articles on almost every topic in Judaism. Additionally, the website hosts live chat sessions with Rabbis who are available to answer any question. Aish has an online community of over 3 million followers across multiple social media platforms. 
Branches
There are 30 full-time branches on five continents, providing seminars, singles events, executive learning groups, Shabbat and Jewish holiday programs, educational classes, and community building. These branches are all their own separate entities and serve their own communities, but they operate under the same banner and share a similar history. 
The Dan Family Aish World Center
The Jerusalem headquarters includes a high-tech main campus and outreach center, that features a rooftop vista overlooking the Temple Mount.
The Jerusalem Yeshiva

In Jerusalem, the Aish yeshiva offers both beginners' "drop-in classes" and full-time, intensive study programs for Jewish men and women of all backgrounds and levels of knowledge. The offering extends through a 4-year semikhah (rabbinic ordination) program; previously, participants were tested by the posek Zalman Nechemia Goldberg.

Discovery Seminar
Aish HaTorah runs the Discovery Seminar. The four-hour seminar reviews Jewish history, Jewish philosophy, and Jewish philosophy questions. The Discovery Seminar aims to imbue participants with a newfound connection to Judaism, discovering its depth, beauty, and practical significance in their daily lives. 
Essentials Program
Essentials classes is a series of ongoing drop-in classes that explore critical topics such as God, religion, relationships, Jewish history, and philosophy. With  teachers and educators, each session offers diverse perspectives. These classes are offered at the Aish World Center in Jerusalem.
Hasbara Fellowships

The Israeli Foreign Ministry worked with Aish HaTorah to combat anti-Israel ideas on college campuses via the Hasbara Fellowships. This program has flown hundreds of student leaders to Israel for intensive training in pro-Israel activism training. In North America, Hasbara Fellowships guides and funds pro-Israel activities on over 100 college campuses.

Embezzlement case
In December 2013, Aish HaTorah of New York filed suit against its former chief financial officer Jacob Fetman to enforce a Beth Din of America ruling that Fetman had stolen $20 million in funds from the organization.

Notable faculty
Noah Weinberg (1930 – 2009), founder
Chaim Malinowitz (1952 – 2019)
Rabbi Steven Burg (2015–present), CEO
Rabbi Yitzchak Berkovits (2019-present) Rosh Yeshiva
Rabbi Dov Ber Cohen (2015 - Present) Senior Educator

References
External links
https://aish.com/