694
Computing platform
A computing platform, digital platform, or software platform is the infrastructure on which software is executed. While the individual components of a computing platform  may be obfuscated under layers of abstraction, the summation of the required components comprise the computing platform. 
Sometimes, the most relevant layer for a specific software is called a computing platform in itself to facilitate the communication, referring to the whole using only one of its attributes – i.e. using a metonymy. 
For example, in a single computer system, this would be the computer's architecture, operating system (OS), and runtime libraries. In the case of an application program or a computer video game, the most relevant layer is the operating system, so it can be called a platform itself (hence the term cross-platform for software that can be executed on multiple OSes, in this context). 
In a multi-computer system, such as in the case of offloading processing, it would encompass both the host computer's hardware, operating system (OS), and runtime libraries along with other computers utilized for  processing that are accessed via application programming interfaces or a web browser. As long as it is a required component for the program code to execute, it is part of the computing platform.

Components
Platforms may also include:

Hardware alone, in the case of small embedded systems. Embedded systems can access hardware directly, without an OS; this is referred to as running on "bare metal".
Device drivers and firmwares.
A browser in the case of web-based software. The browser itself runs on a hardware+OS platform, but this is not relevant to software running within the browser.
An application, such as a spreadsheet or word processor, which hosts software written in an application-specific scripting language, such as an Excel macro. This can be extended to writing fully-fledged applications with the Microsoft Office suite as a platform.
Software frameworks that provide ready-made functionality.
Cloud computing and Platform as a Service. Extending the idea of a software framework, these allow application developers to build software out of components that are hosted not by the developer, but by the provider, with internet communication linking them together. The social networking sites Twitter and Facebook are also considered development platforms.
A application virtual machine (VM) such as the Java virtual machine or .NET CLR. Applications are compiled into a format similar to machine code, known as bytecode, which is then executed by the VM.
A virtualized version of a complete system, including virtualized hardware, OS, software, and storage. These allow, for instance, a typical Windows program to run on what is physically a Mac.
Some architectures have multiple layers, with each layer acting as a platform for the one above it. In general, a component only has to be adapted to the layer immediately beneath it. For instance, a Java program has to be written to use the Java virtual machine (JVM) and associated libraries as a platform but does not have to be adapted to run on the Windows, Linux or Macintosh OS platforms. However, the JVM, the layer beneath the application, does have to be built separately for each OS.

Operating system examples
Desktop, laptop, server
Unix and Unix-like
BSD
NeXTSTEP
Darwin
macOS
OpenDarwin
386BSD
NetBSD
OpenBSD
FreeBSD
DragonFly BSD
System V
HP-UX
IBM AIX
A/UX
Solaris
OpenSolaris
illumos
OpenIndiana
GNU Hurd
Linux
Android
ChromeOS
OSF/1
Tru64 UNIX
z/OS
VM
OpenVMS
DOS
MS-DOS / IBM PC DOS
Windows 9x
FreeDOS
QNX
Classic Mac OS
AmigaOS
OS/2
IBM i
Windows NT
BeOS
Haiku
HarmonyOS

Mobile
Newton OS
Palm OS
Symbian
BlackBerry OS
Windows Mobile
Unix and Unix-like
iOS
iPadOS
watchOS
Linux
Android
Fire OS
LineageOS
webOS
Bada
Ubuntu Touch
Tizen
Firefox OS
KaiOS
Sailfish OS
LuneOS
postmarketOS
Windows
Windows Phone
Windows 10 Mobile
BlackBerry 10
HarmonyOS
Fuchsia

Software examples
Shockwave
Binary Runtime Environment for Wireless (BREW)
Cocoa
Cocoa Touch
.NET
Mono
.NET Framework
Silverlight
Flash
AIR
Java
Java ME
Java SE
Java EE
JavaFX
JavaFX Mobile
LiveCode
Microsoft XNA
Mozilla Prism, XUL and XULRunner
Mozilla WebExtensions API is modeled after Google Chrome's API. Thus Firefox extensions are now largely compatible with their Chrome counterparts.
Web platform
Oracle Database
Qt
SAP NetWeaver
Smartface
Universal Windows Platform
Windows Runtime
HMS Core
Cangjie
ArkTS
ArkUI
ArkUI-X
Huawei Phoenix Engine
Phoenix Engine Ray Shop

Hardware examples
ARM architecture based devices
Raspberry Pi or Gumstix full function miniature computers
ARM servers with Unix-like systems such as Linux or BSD variants
ChromeBooks from various manufacturers
IBM PC compatible systems
IBM System p and IBM Power Systems computers
IBM z/Architecture mainframes
CP/M computers based on the S-100 bus, maybe the earliest microcomputer platform
Video game consoles, any variety (PlayStation, Xbox, Nintendo)
3DO Interactive Multiplayer, that was licensed to manufacturers
Apple Pippin, a multimedia player platform for video game console development
Supercomputer architectures

See also
Cross-platform software
Hardware virtualization
Third platform
Platform ecosystem

References
External links

 Media related to [Computing](693) platforms at Wikimedia Commons
Ryan Sarver: What is a platform?